Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux
Tubes: Theory
The magnetic field in the photospheric layers of the
Sun is found to occur not in a homogeneous form
but in discrete concentrations of intense field. The
most obvious form of magnetic flux (magnetic field
strength times surface area occupied by the field) is
seen in SUNSPOTS but it turns out that much smaller
arrangements of magnetic field are to be found in the lanes
between granules where downdraughts occur (see SOLAR
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). These are the photospheric flux
tubes: small-scale concentrations of intense magnetic field.
The tubes have diameters of a few hundred kilometers
or smaller and field strengths of 1–2 kG. Generally found
in intergranular lanes, they are subject to the dynamical
nature of the photospheric environment with its sound
waves and flows. The tubes are isolated flux tubes in that
their immediate surroundings are essentially field-free.
See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: OBSERVATIONS.
The small-scale tubes of the photosphere may be
thought of as the elemental building blocks of solar
magnetism, so an understanding of intense flux tubes has
implications for a wider understanding of solar and stellar
magnetic phenomena. Theoretical progress in modelling
small-scale flux tubes builds on the fact that in such tubes
variations across the interior of a tube are less important
than variations along the tube.
The elemental photospheric flux tube is taken to
be a cylinder of magnetic flux embedded in a field-free
environment; the photospheric flux tube is thus a region
of locally high Alfvén speed. Two basic speeds prove
central to an understanding of tube dynamics: the slow
tube speed ct and the kink speed ck . These speeds are
in turn defined in terms of the sound speed and Alfvén
speed. For a tube of magnetic field strength B0 with plasma
density ρ0 and pressure p0 , the sound speed cs and Alfvén
speed vA of the tube are defined by

cs =

γp0
ρ0



1/2
vA =

B02
µρ0

1/2
(1)

where γ (generally taken to be 5/3) is the ratio of specific
heats of the plasma and µ is its magnetic permeability.
From the speeds cs and vA we may construct the slow
magnetoacoustic speed ct and the kink speed ck of a tube:
ct =

cs vA
(cs2 + vA2 )1/2


ck =

ρ0
ρ0 + ρ e

1/2
vA

(2)

here ρe denotes the plasma density of the field-free
environment of the tube. The slow tube speed and the
kink speed are important in coronal flux tubes too (see
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES).
A photospheric flux tube is typically a region of
plasma density depletion: the presence of the magnetic
field leads to a plasma pressure reduction inside the tube,
in keeping with the requirement of transverse pressure

balance, and unless there are substantial temperature
differences between the tube and its environment then
this reduction in plasma pressure is accompanied by a
reduction in plasma density. In other words, the magnetic
field of a photospheric flux tube partially evaculates
the plasma. This is in contrast to the coronal flux
tube which is generally a region of plasma enhancement
and reduced Alfvén speed, achieved without violation
of pressure balance because the strong and pervasive
magnetic field of the solar corona can easily accommodate
any enhancements or reductions in the plasma pressure.
The thermal structure of a photospheric flux tube
is complicated. The tube may exchange heat with its
surroundings, through radiative transport and convective
energy transport. Detailed numerical studies suggest that
photospheric magnetic flux tubes are hotter than their
surroundings in their upper layers but cooler than their
surroundings in their deeper layers.
The speeds ct and ck of a photospheric flux tube
are sub-Alfvénic, and the slow speed is also sub-sonic;
whether the kink speed is sub-sonic depends on the
specific parameters of the tube. A numerical illustration
is of interest. In a photospheric flux tube with B0 = 2 kG
and plasma density ρ0 = 2.2 × 10−4 kg m−3 , the Alfvén
speed is vA = 12 km s−1 . Taking the sound speed cs of
the photosphere to be 8 km s−1 then gives a slow speed
of ct = 6.7 km s−1 . For a flux tube that has depleted its
plasma density to some 50% of its environment (so that
ρ0 = ρe /2, consistent with an environment sound speed
of 9.6 km s−1 ), we obtain ck = 6.9 km s−1 . Thus the slow
speed ct is some 56% of the Alfvén speed and the kink
speed ck is about 57% of the Alfvén speed. The precise
ordering of the two speeds depends on the details of the
modelling.
The speeds ct and ck are associated with the dynamics
of flux tubes, arising in both wave phenomena and flows
in tubes. The speed ct , made up in equal measure of
the sound speed and the Alfvén speed, is evidentally
associated with the compressibility of the tube. Any
squeezing of a tube results in increases in the magnetic
pressure and plasma pressure in the tube, which act to
restore the undisturbed state. This is a feature shared by
all elastic tubes and consequently the equivalent of the
speed ct arises in a variety of other physical situations,
with the role of the Alfvén speed being played by the
appropriate elastic speed of an elastic tube. For example,
in the case of a blood vessel the equivalent of the speed vA
is simply the elastic speed in the membrane of the blood
vessel. The speed of sound cs in blood is much larger
than the elastic speed and so the slow speed is close to
the elastic speed of the blood vessel. For water in a pipe,
the relative magnitudes of the two basic speeds depend
on the material of the pipe. In a metal pipe, the elastic
speed is much larger than the sound speed in water and
so the effective slow speed is close to the sound speed in
water (about 1.4 km s−1 ). By contrast, in a plastic pipe the
orderings in the two speeds are reversed and the effective
propagation speed is close to the elastic speed in plastic

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

1

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

(about 10 m s−1 ), lying far below the speed of sound in
water.
The kink speed involves both the tube and its
environment. The kink wave which propagates with this
speed (see below) involves the magnetic tension force
in the tube and the kink wave displaces both the tube
and its surroundings by about equal measures, hence the
combined occurrence of the densities ρ0 and ρe . The speed
also arises in the description of magnetoacoustic surface
waves on an interface between two plasmas of different
properties.
An important question in the physics of photospheric
flux tubes is how are they formed.
A flux tube
with kilogauss field strength requires strong forces
to bring about its intense state, with the magnetic
pressure B02 /2µ being far in excess of the pressure
of converging flows that granulation may provide;
the tube finds equilibrium through evacuation of its
interior, reducing the plasma pressure and thus allowing
magnetostatic pressure balance between the flux tube
and its environment to occur. It is envisaged that
granulation acts to ‘shepherd’ flux tubes into the regions
where downdraughts between the granules occur. The
process is an example of flux expulsion (by advection),
whereby the convective flows of the photosphere move
magnetic field into intergranular lanes, in keeping with
the frozen flux concept of ideal MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS.
The process is not of itself sufficient to account for the
observed field strengths; it brings about the ‘seedlings’
of photospheric flux tubes but other effects are needed
to produce the observationally determined intense field
strengths. The additional process that comes into play
is driven by the super-adiabatic temperature gradient of
the solar convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION
ZONE), which in field-free regions drives the convective
flows (granules and supergranules; see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE:
SUPERGRANULATION) that distinguish the Sun’s convection.
In flux tubes, convectively driven flows are channelled by
the tubes. The fact that photospheric flux tubes reside
in a plasma that is stratified by gravity means that any
downdraught generated within a flux tube brings less
dense plasma from the higher reaches of the stratified tube
to the deeper layers within the tube, allowing the high
plasma pressure of the environment to squeeze the tube
further. An increase in magnetic field strength results. The
process is referred to as convective collapse. It may be
described in mathematical detail for a thin flux tube (see
below).
A flow in a magnetic flux tube may also develop
because of pressure differences between the footpoints of
the tube. For example, if the footpoints of a tube are rooted
in regions that are magnetically distinct from one another,
such as one footpoint in a sunspot and the other in a fieldfree region, then plasma pressure differences arise and a
flow may be driven in the tube. Such motions of the plasma
within the tube are called siphon flows.

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

Waves in photospheric flux tubes
To give a detailed description of the magnetohydrodyanmic waves that an isolated photospheric flux tube supports we consider the equations of ideal MHD. Consider
an equilibrium magnetic field B0 = B0 (r)ẑ aligned with
the z-axis of a cylindrical polar coordinate system (r, θ, z).
To begin with we will ignore the effects of gravity. Then
the equilibrium plasma pressure p0 (r) of a radially structured magnetic atmosphere is such as to maintain total
pressure balance: the sum of the plasma pressure p0 (r)
and the magnetic pressure B02 (r)/2µ is a constant. Where
the field is strong, as in the center of a flux tube, the plasma
pressure is correspondingly reduced.
Small-amplitude motions v = (vr , vθ , vz ) about a
structured equilibrium state satisfy the coupled wave
equations

ρ0 (r)

∂2
∂2
− vA2 (r) 2
2
∂t
∂z


vr +

∂ 2 pT
=0
∂r∂t

(3)




∂2
∂2
1 ∂ 2 pT
2
=0
−
v
(r)
vθ +
A
2
2
∂t
∂z
r ∂θ∂t
 2

∂
∂2
c2 (r)
1 ∂ 2 pT
2
−
c
(r)
vz = − 2 s 2
t
2
2
∂t
∂z
cs (r) + vA (r) ρ0 (r) ∂z∂t
ρ0 (r)

(4)
(5)

with the evolution of pT (r, θ, z) described by
∂pT
∂vz
= ρ0 (r)vA2 (r)
− ρ0 (r)[cs2 (r) + vA2 (r)]div v .
∂t
∂z

(6)

Here ct (r), cs (r) and vA (r) denote the slow speed, sound
speed and Alfvén speed within the radially structured
plasma, of density ρ0 (r). Equations (3)–(5) come from
the components of the momentum equation in which
the magnetic force has been expressed in terms of the
perturbation in total pressure pT , defined as the sum of
the perturbation p in the dynamical plasma pressure and
the magnetic pressure perturbation B0 (r)Bz /µ, with Bz
being the component of the perturbed magnetic field in
the direction of the applied magnetic field B0 . Equation
(6) results from a combination of the isentropic (adiabatic)
equation and the induction equation of ideal MHD.
One solution of the above equations is the torsional
Alfvén wave, which propagates motions vθ , independent
of θ, according to the wave equation
∂ 2 vθ
∂ 2 vθ
= vA2 (r) 2 .
∂t 2
∂z

(7)

Torsional oscillations, which have vr = 0, vz = 0 and pT =
0, have a radial dependence determined by the manner
in which the oscillations are generated. The oscillations
exhibit phase mixing by which radial gradients of the
motion grow rapidly in regions where the Alfvén speed
vA (r) varies sharply in r.
In addition to torsional Alfvén waves there are
motions that are compressive, with p = 0 and pT = 0.
We examine the elemental magnetic flux tube that models
photospheric conditions, taking the applied magnetic field

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

2

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

B0 (r)ẑ to be confined within a cylindrical tube of radius
a. The plasma pressure and density within the tube are p0
and ρ0 ; the corresponding plasma pressure and density in
the tube’s field-free environment are pe and ρe . The tube is
in magnetostatic pressure balance with its surroundings:
pe = p0 + B02 /2µ. With cs and vA now denoting the
sound speed and Alfvén speed within the tube and ce the
sound speed in the tube’s environment, pressure balance
combined with the ideal gas law then shows that the
plasma density ρ0 within the tube is related to the density
ρe in the tube’s environment through
ρ0
c2
= 2 1e 2 .
ρe
cs + 2 γ v A

(8)

Thus, for sound speeds cs and ce that are roughly
comparable, a photospheric flux tube is a region of density
depletion (i.e. ρ0 < ρe ).
Now the media inside and outside the elemental
flux tube are uniform, and this affords a considerable
simplification. In a uniform medium, the wave equations
(3)–(6) may be combined to yield an equation for pT .
Writing
pT (r, θ, z, t) = pT (r) exp i(ωt + nθ − kz z)
provides a Fourier description of the motions, of frequency
ω, longitudinal wavenumber kz and azimuthal number
n. The integer n(= 0, 1, 2, . . .) describes the geometrical
form of the perturbations. The case n = 0 gives the
sausage wave and corresponds to symmetric squeezings
and rarefactions of the tube; these are compressional (pT =
0) oscillations. The case n = 1 describes the kink wave of
the tube; in such waves the motion of the tube resembles
a wriggling snake, with the whole tube being displaced
without changing its cross-sectional shape. Finally, there
are also waves with n ≥ 2; these are the fluting waves.
For a uniform tube, pT satisfies
r2

dpT
d 2 pT
+r
− (m20 r 2 + n2 )pT = 0
dr 2
dr

where
m20 =

(9)

(kz2 cs2 − ω2 )(kz2 vA2 − ω2 )
.
(cs2 + vA2 )(kz2 ct2 − ω2 )

This is a form of Bessel’s equation with solution pT =
In (m0 r) inside (r < a) the tube; In is a modified Bessel
function. Similarly, in the field-free environment (r > a)
of the flux tube, where the sound speed is ce , a solution
pT proportional to the modified Bessel function Kn (me r)
arises, where
ω2
m2e = kz2 − 2 .
ce
It is usual to examine modes for which m2e is positive,
corresponding to selecting waves that are confined to near
the tube. Then, matching pT and vr across r = a results in
1
ρ0 (kz2 vA2

−

ω2 )

m0

1
In (m0 a)
K  (me a)
+
=0
me n
2
In (m0 a) ρe ω
Kn (me a)

(10)

where a prime ( ) denotes the derivative of a modified
Bessel function (e.g. In (m0 a) ≡ dIn (x)/dx evaluated at
x = m0 a, etc). This is the dispersion relation for tube
waves in an isolated magnetic flux tube, requiring that
me > 0; surface waves arise whenever m20 > 0, and body
waves occur if m20 < 0. It is evident that tube waves are
dispersive, their phase speed c(≡ ω/kz ) depending on the
wavenumber (in the combination kz a).
Solution of the dispersion relation (10), for conditions
appropriate for an isolated photospheric flux tube, show
that there are slow body waves (both sausage and kink)
with phase speeds c that lie between ct and cs and slow
surface waves which have phase speeds that are less than
ct . Also, there is a surface wave with a phase speed close
to the kink speed ck and another surface wave with phase
speed near ce . Fluting modes also have speeds close to ck .
There is particular interest in waves that are much
1.
longer than a tube diameter, corresponding to kz a
This is the thin flux tube limit, of special interest for
photospheric flux tubes. Since generally ω ∼ kz vA , the
1 corresponds to requiring that periods
condition kz a
50 s for
τ (≡ 2π/ω) are such that τ
2πa/vA , giving τ
a tube of radius a = 100 km. P-modes, for example, have
periods around 300 s, roughly meeting this criterion. With
1, the slow surface wave has phase speed close to
kz a
ct .
Dispersion relations such as equation (10) are
important in the development of a nonlinear wave theory
for a tube. Indeed, it has been shown that slow (sausage)
surface waves have motions v(z, t) along a thin tube which
satisfy the nonlinear integrodifferential equation
∂v
∂3
∂v
∂v
+ ct
+ β0 v
+ α0 3
∂t
∂z
∂z
∂z



∞

v(s, t) ds
= 0.
[λ2 a 2 + (z − s)2 ]1/2
(11)
and λ depend on the various
−∞

The constants α0 , β0
parameters of the tube.
Equation (11) is sometimes referred to as the
Leibovich–Roberts equation. An explicit form of its
solution is not known although it is amenable to numerical
solution. It is of particular interest because it is associated
with soliton behavior. Solitons are nonlinear waves with
specific interaction properties that make them worthy of
special study. For the related problem of a magnetic slab—
the Cartesian equivalent of a flux tube—the equation
describing the weakly nonlinear slow surface wave is the
Benjamin–Ono equation, i.e.
∂v
∂2
∂v
∂v
+ ct
+ β0 v
+ α1 2
∂t
∂z
∂z
∂z



∞

−∞

v(s, t)
ds = 0
s−z

(12)

for constant α1 . The Benjamin–Ono equation has been
studied extensively and its soliton solution is known
explicitly.
Equations (11) and (12) may be derived
using thin flux tube theory (see below) or from the
full equations of ideal MHD, assuming that motions are
weakly nonlinear and weakly dispersive.

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

3

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

z

Thin flux tube theory
The restriction to thin tubes, in the sense that waves
are much longer than a tube radius (so that kz a
1),
leads to a considerable simplification in the description
of the dynamics of photospheric flux tubes, so much so
that it becomes possible to include a number of other
effects ignored in the discussion of an elemental magnetic
flux tube. Of particular importance is the influence of
stratification brought about by gravity. The pressure scale
height in the photosphere is comparable with a tube radius
so the effects of gravity are particularly significant in the
photospheric layers of a tube. Other effects, such as
radiative transport, may also in principle be included in
thin flux tube theory.
To describe motions in a thin tube in the presence
of gravity the so-called thin flux tube equations are
used. These equations have been used extensively for
both analytical and numerical investigations of flux tube
dynamics. The sausage and kink modes are treated
separately. The thin tube equations for the sausage mode
(in ideal MHD) are
∂
∂
ρA + ρvA = 0
∂t
∂z

(13)

∂v
∂v
1 ∂p
+v
=−
−g
∂t
∂z
ρ ∂z


∂p
∂p
γp ∂ρ
∂ρ
+v
=
+v
∂t
∂z
ρ
∂t
∂z
BA = constant
p+

(15)

2

(17)

In these equations, B(z, t) is the field strength of a
thin tube with cross-sectional area A(z, t), and v(z, t) is
the longitudinal flow speed within the tube, where the
plasma pressure and density are p(z, t) and ρ(z, t). The
gravitational acceleration is g(=274 m s−2 ), acting in the
negative z-direction. The external gas pressure pe (z, t)
is calculated on the boundary of the tube and may vary
in response to motions in the tube or its environment;
pressure balance across the tube is maintained at all times
(as expressed by equation (17)).
In equilibrium (v = 0, ∂/∂t = 0) the thin tube
equations for a magnetic flux tube in temperature balance
with its surroundings (so that cs = ce ) yield
p0 (z) = p0 (0) e−N

ρ0 (z) = ρ0 (0)

A0 (z) = A0 (0) eN/2
where

%0 (0) −N
e
%0 (z)

B0 (z) = B0 (0) e−N/2


z

N(z) =
0

r

(18)

dz
%0 (z)

is the integrated pressure scale height; %0 (z)(≡p0 (z)gρ0 (z))
is the pressure scale height inside the tube. See figure 1.

pe

g
Bo

Figure 1. Equilibrium state of a thin magnetic flux tube in a
stratified plasma. The tube is confined by the external plasma
pressure pe in the field-free environment of the tube. The region
within the tube is generally of lower plasma density than the
environment.

The linear form of the thin tube equations is readily
found for the equilibrium (18). Ignoring contributions
from variations in pe , longitudinal motions are found to
satisfy the Klein–Gordon equation
∂ 2Q
∂ 2Q
− ct2 (z) 2 + '2S (z)Q = 0
2
∂t
∂z

(14)

(16)

B
= pe .
2µ

Bo

(19)

where Q(z, t) is related to the flow v(z, t) and '2S (z)
depends on the details of the equilibrium state.
In an isothermal atmosphere, %0 , ct and '2S are all
constants, with




2
4c2
c2
9
1
'2S = t 2
−
+ s2 1 −
.
(20)
4 γ
γ
4%0
γ vA
The Klein–Gordon equation (19) then yields the dispersion
relation
ω2 = kz2 ct2 + '2S

(21)

which shows that 'S is a cutoff frequency (for sausage
waves in a thin tube). '2S may be viewed as made up of
two contributions, the first (corresponding to the first term
on the right-hand side of equation (20)) arising from the
geometrical shape of the undisturbed tube and the second
(corresponding to the second term on the right of equation
(20)) being determined by the tube’s elasticity. A rigid
tube with exponential cross-sectional area (determined
according to the equilibrium (18) with %0 constant) has
cutoff frequency (9/4 − 2/γ )1/2 cs /2%0 , whereas a straight
and vertical rigid tube has cutoff frequency cs /2%0 . In
general the cutoff frequency for the sausage mode in a
tube is less than the cutoff frequency of a rigid tube.
The Klein–Gordon equation also describes the kink
mode in a thin tube. Thin tube equations for the kink mode
may be used to describe the transverse displacements
ξ(z, t) of a vertical tube, leading to the wave equation


∂ 2ξ
∂ 2ξ
ρ0 − ρe ∂ξ
2
.
(22)
= ck (z) 2 + g
∂t 2
∂z
ρ0 + ρe ∂z

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

4

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

Equation (22) may be cast into an equation of the Klein–
Gordon form, just as for the sausage mode. For an
isothermal medium, the dispersion relation for the kink
mode is
ω2 = kz2 ck2 + '2K
(23)

With the illustrative boundary conditions that u = 0 at
levels z = 0 and z = −d, we obtain the approximate
solution


 πz 
z
u(z) = u0 exp
sin
(26)
4%0
d

where the cutoff frequency for the kink mode is

with

'K =



ck
.
4%0

The forms (19)–(24) allow a direct comparison
between sausage and kink modes. For example, with
again vA = 12 km s−1 , cs = 8 km s−1 and %0 = 140 km,
sausage and kink modes both grow in amplitude by a
factor of e in propagating a distance of 560 km (four scale
heights). The sausage wave, propagating with a speed
ct = 6.7 km s−1 , has a cyclic cutoff frequency, 'S /2π, of
4.2 mHz (period 240 s). The kink wave has a speed of
ck = 6.9 km s−1 , close to the sausage mode’s, but its cutoff
frequency at 2 mHz (period 500 s) is very different. The
sausage mode’s behavior is similar to that of a vertically
propagating sound wave, which has a propagation speed
of 8 km s−1 and cutoff frequency of 4.5 mHz (period 220 s),
although it e-folds in just 280 km (two scale heights);
consequently, sound waves are expected to form shocks
lower in the atmosphere than tube waves. The fact that
the cutoff frequency of the kink mode is considerably
smaller than the cutoff frequency of the sausage wave or
a sound wave suggests that kink waves may survive to
higher levels in the solar atmosphere than sausage waves
or sound waves.
The dispersion relations (21) and (23) imply that an
impulsively generated wave (sausage or kink) results in a
wavefront which propagates with the speed ct or ck , the
wavefront supporting an oscillating wake which rises and
falls with the frequency 'S or 'K .

Convective collapse
Convective collapse, the process by which a photospheric
flux tube may be formed with kilogauss field strengths,
may be demonstrated from the thin flux tube equations
for the sausage mode. The differential equation satisfied
by the longitudinal flow, Fourier analyzed by writing
v(z, t) = u(z) exp(iωt), is
B0 d
ρ0 dz



ρ0 ct2 du
B0 dz



where
ωg2


 2

γ ct2
ct
+
+ ω2 − ωg2
u=0
2cs2
vA2
g
=
%0


%0

γ −1
+
γ

ω2 = ct2

(24)

(25)



is the square of the Brunt–Väisäla (or buoyancy) frequency
of a plasma element in a stratified atmosphere. In
the atmosphere of a flux tube embedded within the
solar convection zone, ωg2 is negative and this drives an
instability within the tube. The magnetic field may quench
the instability if it is sufficiently strong. This is readily
illustrated by an approximate solution of equation (25).

1
π2
+
+
d 2 16%20



1
γ
+ 2
2cs
vA2




ωg2 .

Hence, if ωg2 < 0 then a mode with ω2 < 0 may arise,
corresponding to an instability. The instability amounts to
a flow of plasma within the stratified tube; a downdraught
brings the more tenuous plasma in the higher levels of the
tube to layers deeper within the tube, allowing the external
plasma pressure to squeeze the tube. A stronger field
results. This is convective collapse. The process is halted
when the field strength B0 is sufficiently large to resist
the compression of the tube, and so quench the instability
(reducing ω2 to zero). A flux tube with only moderate field
strength finds itself subject to the instability until it has
strengthened itself, through convective collapse, to a state
where it may resist the process. Consequently, intense and
isolated magnetic flux tubes are the expected norm in any
medium such as the solar photosphere where convective
effects operate in the presence of magnetic field.
A determination of the field strength necessary to
quench the instability depends on the precise details of
the modelling. Studies of the process under conditions
appropriate for the solar convection zone show that
kilogauss field strengths are required before the collapse
is halted. However, what precisely is the ensuing state
of a collapsed flux tube remains uncertain, mainly as a
result of the need to take into account a number of detailed
and complicated effects ignored in the above treatment. In
particular, it is necessary to include the effects of RADIATIVE
TRANSFER, nonlinearity and a more realistic choice of flow
boundary conditions.

Numerical simulations
Numerical simulations allow the inclusion of a variety of
effects that complicate the description of the basic modes
of behavior of photospheric flux tubes, and this promotes
a more direct comparison with solar observations. By
following the motion of a parcel of magnetized fluid (using
a so-called Lagrangian approach), it proves possible, for
example, to explore the linear and nonlinear sausage and
kink modes in a vertical tube or to simulate the convective
collapse process. These problems are usually addressed
through numerical solution of thin flux tube equations,
allowing for the important effects of stratification. Broadly,
analytic theory for an ideal plasma has provided valuable
insights for the more complex modelling of flux tubes
under conditions representative of the solar photosphere.
Thin flux tube theory for the kink mode has also been
applied to modelling the behaviour of a nonvertical flux
tube, addressing in particular the important question of

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

5

Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory

E N C Y C LO P E D IA O F A S T R O N O M Y AN D A S T R O P H Y S I C S

how magnetic field stored below the convection zone is
transported to the solar surface.
An important question still under active consideration is how to incorporate the environment’s back-reaction
on a moving flux tube. The effect has been explored for the
sausage mode and leads to the formation of solitons; the
influence of stratification on flux tube solitons has not so
far been explored. The back-reaction of the environment
on the kink mode is somewhat uncertain, with several alternative possibilities suggested in the literature.
The behaviour of shocks excited within tubes and
also the formation of shocks and downflows as a result
of the convective collapse of a tube have been modelled
in two-dimensional simulations. Numerical simulations
have also permitted realistic estimates of the energy flux
carried by the various waves, allowing applications to the
Sun and stellar atmospheres more generally to be explored.
Bibliography
Hollweg J V 1990 MHD waves on solar magnetic flux tubes
Physics of Magnetic Flux Ropes (Geophys. Monogr. 58) ed
C T Russell, E R Priest and L C Lee (Washington, DC:
AGU) p 23
Parker E N 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: Oxford
University Press) pp 841
Roberts B 1992 Magnetohydrodynamic waves in structured magnetic fields Sunspots: Theory and Observations ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht:
Kluwer) p 303
Roberts B and Ulmschneider P 1997 Dynamics of flux tubes
in the solar atmosphere: theory Solar and Heliospheric
Plasma Physics ed G M Simnett, C E Alissandrakis and
L Vlahos (Berlin: Springer) p 75
Ryutova M P 1990 Waves and oscillations in magnetic
flux tubes Solar Photosphere: Structure, Convection,
and Magnetic Fields (IAU Symp. 138) ed J O Stenflo
(Dordrecht: Reidel) p 229
Schüssler M 1990 Theoretical aspects of small-scale photospheric magnetic fields Solar Photosphere: Structure,
Convection, and Magnetic Fields (IAU Symp. 138) ed J
O Stenflo (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 161
Spruit H C 1981 Magnetic flux tubes The Sun as a Star
(NASA SP-450) ed S Jordan (Washington, DC: NASA)
p 385
Spruit H C and Roberts B 1983 Magnetic flux tubes on the
Sun Nature 304 401
Spruit H C, Schüssler M and Solanki S K 1991 Filigree and
flux tube physics Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed A
N Cox, W C Livingston and M S Matthews (Tucson,
AZ: University of Arizona Press) p 890
B Roberts

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK

6

