The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

C 2011.

doi:10.1088/0004-637X/727/1/17

The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

NUMERICAL MODELING OF FOOTPOINT-DRIVEN MAGNETO-ACOUSTIC WAVE PROPAGATION
IN A LOCALIZED SOLAR FLUX TUBE
V. Fedun1 , S. Shelyag1,2 , and R. Erdélyi1
1

2

Solar Physics and Space Plasma Research Centre, Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Sheffield,
Hounsfield Road, Hicks Building, Sheffield, S3 7RH, UK
Astrophysics Research Centre, School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK
Received 2010 August 17; accepted 2010 November 9; published 2010 December 23

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present and discuss results of two-dimensional simulations of linear and nonlinear magnetoacoustic wave propagation through an open magnetic flux tube embedded in the solar atmosphere expanding from
the photosphere through to the transition region and into the low corona. Our aim is to model and analyze the
response of such a magnetic structure to vertical and horizontal periodic motions originating in the photosphere.
To carry out the simulations, we employed our MHD code SAC (Sheffield Advanced Code). A combination of the
VALIIIC and McWhirter solar atmospheres and coronal density profiles were used as the background equilibrium
model in the simulations. Vertical and horizontal harmonic sources, located at the footpoint region of the open
magnetic flux tube, are incorporated in the calculations, to excite oscillations in the domain of interest. To perform
the analysis we have constructed a series of time–distance diagrams of the vertical and perpendicular components of
the velocity with respect to the magnetic field lines at each height of the computational domain. These time–distance
diagrams are subject to spatio-temporal Fourier transforms allowing us to build ω–k dispersion diagrams for all of
the simulated regions in the solar atmosphere. This approach makes it possible to compute the phase speeds of waves
propagating throughout the various regions of the solar atmosphere model. We demonstrate the transformation of
linear slow and fast magneto-acoustic wave modes into nonlinear ones, i.e., shock waves, and also show that
magneto-acoustic waves with a range of frequencies efficiently leak through the transition region into the solar
corona. It is found that the waves interact with the transition region and excite horizontally propagating surface
waves along the transition region for both types of drivers. Finally, we estimate the phase speed of the oscillations
in the solar corona and compare it with the phase speed derived from observations.
Key words: magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) – shock waves – Sun: atmosphere – Sun: oscillations
Online-only material: color figures
ambiguously analyze the observations. The conditions of the
plasma in the solar atmosphere are described reasonably well
by the MHD equations. For a strongly stratified plasma with
a non-uniform magnetic field configuration, the analytical solutions of the MHD equations are not known, thus, numerical
simulations have to be used for such studies.
Theoretical investigations of wave propagation through the
solar plasma attracted particular attention due to the possibility
of inferring the detailed plasma properties from the observations
of solar oscillations. This (known as helioseismological) technique has been considerably exploited to unveil the properties
of the (invisible) solar interior. Only recently, with the advent
of observational instruments with particularly high spatial and
temporal resolutions, has this seismological approach been generalized to the solar chromosphere and corona (see, e.g., Erdélyi
2006; Erdélyi & Fedun 2007; Andries et al. 2009; De Moortel
2009; Ruderman & Erdélyi 2009, for reviews with a range of
applications).
A variety of one- and multi-dimensional HD and MHD
numerical simulations of the solar atmosphere have already been
performed. Recently, linear and nonlinear magneto-acoustic
wave propagation through a magnetic flux tube has been studied
numerically by Cargill et al. (1997), Bogdan et al. (2003), Hasan
et al. (2005), Carlsson & Bogdan (2006), Khomenko & Collados
(2006), Khomenko et al. (2008), Hasan & van Ballegooijen
(2008), Taroyan & Erdélyi (2009), Ofman (2009), Fedun et al.
(2009), and others. The properties of wave propagation in
such numerical simulations, as in the real Sun, are highly
sensitive to the properties of the background atmosphere and

1. INTRODUCTION
Magnetic field plays a fundamental role in the dynamical
processes in the solar atmosphere. Magnetic structures connect
the solar convection zone and photosphere through the transition
region to the solar corona, and may act as a guide for the energy
supply, leaking it from the solar interior to the outer atmosphere
(see, e.g., De Pontieu et al. 2004, 2005) which is necessary for
coronal heating.
Modern ground- and space-based observational instruments,
e.g., ROSA, SST, CoMP, SOHO, Hinode/SOT, SDO/AIA allow
us to study the radiation originating in the solar atmosphere.
Numerous observations of the presence of MHD waves in the
solar atmosphere have been reported (see, e.g., the reviews on
waves and oscillations in open magnetic structures, Banerjee
et al. 2007; on propagating magneto-acoustic waves, De Moortel
2009; on Alfvén waves, Mathioudakis et al. 2011; on the
topic of leakage of p-modes into the transition region, De
Pontieu & Erdélyi 2006 and others). The observational report
by Scullion et al. (2010) claims to determine horizontally
propagating energetic transition region quakes as a result of
the wave leakage. Erdélyi & Taroyan (2008) has shown the
detection of oscillations by the EUV Imaging Spectrometer
(Hinode/EIS). There is no evidence that these motions are
generated by a flare. This is an important indication for our
current study and is the Hinode counterpart of observations by
Tomczyk & McIntosh (2009).
A certain lack of the detailed understanding of the physical
processes in the solar plasma often makes it difficult to un1

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

It should also be mentioned that in our simulations the
radiative losses, dissipative and thermal conduction terms are
not included. Importance of these effects on wave propagation
and mode conversion will be analyzed in future.
In this work, the propagation of slow and fast magnetoacoustic waves, excited by vertical and horizontal drivers, in
a two-dimensional magnetic flux tube embedded in a realistically stratified solar atmosphere from the photospheric region
to the lower part of solar corona is addressed. We have analyzed
the time–distance and spectral properties of wave propagation
in the various solar atmospheric regions spanning from photosphere to corona.
The paper is organized as follows. The numerical method
used to carry out the simulations and the model of the
solar atmosphere are outlined in Section 2. The magnetic field configuration and the sources that generate the
wave modes in the computational domain are presented in
Section 3. In the following section, we discuss and examine in detail the various aspects of linear and nonlinear wave
evolution in the lower and upper solar atmospheric regions.
Section 5 is the conclusion.

Figure 1. Vertical dependences of logarithms of the density ρ and the
temperature T in the computational domain. These profiles are constructed
using atmospheric parameters for the average quiet Sun (VAL IIIC; Vernazza
et al. 1981) for the lower part of the model, and McWhirter et al. (1975) coronal
model for the upper (corona) region.

the configuration of the magnetic field (as pointed out in
various investigations by Dı́az & Roberts 2006; Ruderman et al.
2008; Verth et al. 2008; Verth & Erdélyi 2008; Zaqarashvili &
Skhirtladze 2008; Kuridze et al. 2009; Verth et al. 2010).
Cargill et al. (1997) examined the evolution of a nonlinear
Alfvén wave pulse in the region between the solar photosphere
and corona. The magnetic field was chosen to be potential and
the background density and temperature were constructed analytically. These profiles lie somewhere between those expected
in the quiet Sun and active regions. Bogdan et al. (2003) constructed a two-dimensional, time-dependent hydrostatic isothermal MHD model for the investigation of slow and fast magnetoacoustic-gravity monochromatic wave generation, propagation,
transformation and interaction in the solar photosphere and chromosphere regions. The basic magnetic configuration consisted
of a large unipolar magnetic flux concentration surrounded on
each side by two smaller concentrations of opposite-polarity
field. This type of magnetic structure is a popular model for
sunspots, pores or even smaller magnetic flux tubes like magnetic bright points where the equilibrium magnetic field is
strong.
A non-uniform and non-potential magnetic field configuration embedded in a non-uniform photospheric model has been
investigated by Khomenko & Collados (2006) to study the
processes taking place around the equipartition layer (where
VA = CS ) in sunspots.
As the magnetic building block of the lower solar atmosphere,
the chromospheric magnetic network has been simulated by
Hasan et al. (2005) and Hasan & van Ballegooijen (2008) as a
thin (1000 km) layer of the solar atmosphere embedded in nonpotential flux tube with periodic horizontal boundary conditions.
These boundary conditions provide a limit in the simulations due
to the fast waves generated in the system reaching the boundaries
rather quickly.
It is now of particular interest, for the studies of solar MHD
waves and oscillations, to extend the simulations to include the
lower solar corona region, especially in light of their relevance
to MHD heating of the solar corona and the available SDO data
showing wave coupling from the chromosphere to the corona.
Such an extension in the modelling represents significant difficulties for the actual implementation of simulations due to, e.g.,
the tremendous range of the thermodynamical parameters (and,
correspondingly, sound speed) in the simulated region.

2. NUMERICAL METHODS AND MODEL
The two-dimensional version of the Sheffield Advanced Code
(SAC) is applied to carry out the simulations. The code is built on
the basis of the Versatile Advection Code (VAC) by Tóth (1996),
Tóth et al. (1998), Tóth (2000), and Keppens et al. (2003). SAC
is the reconfigurable multi-dimensional ideal MHD solver which
is designed to simulate the nonlinear interaction of an arbitrary
perturbation with a gravitationally stratified background model,
i.e., a model of the solar atmosphere, in magnetohydrostatic
equilibrium. The code uses variable separation and hyperdiffusive and hyper-resistive terms (Stein & Nordlund 1998; Caunt &
Korpi 2001; Vögler et al. 2005; Shelyag et al. 2008) to stabilize
the solution against numerical instabilities and imperfections in
the background model, caused by truncation errors. The main
advantage of the implemented numerical technique is that it
allows us to robustly simulate the macroscopic processes in a
gravitationally stratified, magnetized plasma. A full description
of the code, tests for various standard HD and MHD problems
and the implemented numerical schemes are given in Shelyag
et al. (2008).
For the purpose of this paper the chosen two-dimensional
numerical domain consists of four adjoined parts: the solar
photospheric region including the temperature minimum, the
chromosphere, the transition region and the solar corona. The
upper boundary of the domain is located well within the coronal
layers. As an initial background model, two solar atmosphere
models are joined: the VALIIIC quiet Sun model of Vernazza
et al. (1981) is used to simulate the region between the lower part
of the photosphere; the transition region, and the region above
the transition region is based on the McWhirter et al. (1975)
atmosphere model. Logarithms of the density and temperature
profiles along the vertical direction z are shown in Figure 1.
The simulation domain with the equilibrium parameters is
shown in Figure 3. The dependence of (1) the logarithm of
the background pressure, log(P0 ), (2) the temperature, T, and
(3) the magnetic field components, B0x and B0z , as functions
of height z and horizontal distance x of the equilibrium model
are plotted in four panels of Figure 3, respectively. Note that
only the central part of the numerical box is shown here in the
figures. The full numerical box is 4 Mm wide and 4 Mm high,
and is resolved on 400 × 1976 gridpoints, respectively. The
2

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

white contours represent the iso-plasma-β surfaces, labeled by
their appropriate value of plasma-β. The orange lines are the
equilibrium magnetic field lines in the figure and indicate the
background field distribution in the computational domain. The
method used to construct the structure of the open flux tube is
explained in the next section. Horizontal dashed lines mark
the approximate location of the different solar atmospheric
levels, i.e., photosphere, chromosphere, TR and solar corona. In
all the present simulations we employ non-reflective (“open”)
boundary conditions for perturbed variables. This type of
boundary conditions allows the linear and nonlinear waves to
propagate through the domain boundaries without noticeable
reflection or distortion.
3. THE MAGNETIC FIELD CONFIGURATION
AND DRIVER
The well known self-similarity approach is used to construct
the background non-potential magnetic field configuration. The
main advantages of such type of magnetic field are the following.
Self-similar magnetic fields have a rather simple analytical
description. Compared to potential fields, the non-potential
localized magnetic field configuration, which we use here,
demonstrates a closer resemblance to intergranular magnetic
field concentrations, observed in the solar photosphere, and to
magnetic fields generated by dynamical simulations of magnetoconvection (see, e.g., Shelyag et al. 2010). Finally, self-similar
magnetic fields can be created with a lower expansion factor
compared to their counterparts with potential fields, thus it
is not necessary to use additional localized magnetic field
structures or less-natural periodic boundaries to prevent the
field describing a less realistic expansion. Following the selfsimilarity description, the open magnetic flux tube configuration
is obtained analytically from the following set of equations:
Bx = −

Bz =

Figure 2. Vertical dependence of the ratio of the minimum to the maximum
values of the sound speed taken along the cross section in the x-direction in the
computational domain.

where p is the background kinetic pressure, g is the solar
gravitational acceleration and ρ is the background density. This
method was used previously by Schlüter & Temesváry (1958),
Deinzer (1965), Schüssler & Rempel (2005), Gordovskyy &
Jain (2007), Shelyag et al. (2009), and others. The strength of
the magnetic field at the footpoint region is B0 = 45 G. We
are aware of the strength of present magnetic field is perhaps
too low but it does make it possible to construct the flux tube
without a strong opening at the solar corona region and thus
makes it more practical to connect all four regions of the
solar atmosphere. Low magnetic field strength is chosen not
only for practical reasons. Full convective simulations of solar
photosphere show that the intergranular lanes in the models of
quiet solar granulation (with average unipolar magnetic flux
50 G) are full of vertical magnetic fields which rarely reach
kilogauss values and normally stay within 100G limit. Thus,
the chosen 45 G magnetic field represents quiet intergranular
magnetic field concentrations quite reasonably. A stronger
magnetic field is obviously interesting to analyze due to its
connection to various visible features in the solar photosphere.
An enhanced magnetic field would result in a downward shift of
the equipartition layer and in a stronger opening of the magnetic
flux tube, if the side boundaries of the domain are not periodic
(which we obviously want to avoid, since the main point of the
study is a single flux tube). Nevertheless, the chosen magnetic
field strength is certainly a good approximation for weak and
most likely ubiquitous solar flux tubes in the quiet Sun.
In Figure 2, we show the ratio of the minimum to the
maximum values of the sound speed (Cmin /Cmax ) taken at each
height in the computational domain as a function of z. This
plot allows us to clearly gain insight into the influence of the
constructed magnetic flux tube on the background model. In
the photosphere and lower chromospheric region Cmin /Cmax
is equal to unity. In the upper part of the chromosphere this
ratio (Cmin /Cmax ) is decreasing strongly, due to the increase of
magnetic pressure inside the flux tube. In the transition region
the influence of the magnetic field has maximum effect, which is
evidenced in Figure 2 as a peak at z = 1.95 Mm. In the coronal
region, the ratio Cmin /Cmax has an approximately constant value
of 0.82, i.e., the magnetic flux has a constant shape in this region.

∂f
· G (f ) ,
∂z

∂f
· G (f ) ,
∂x

and
f = x · B0z ,
where B0z is the vertical z-component of the background
magnetic field along the symmetry axis, and G is an arbitrarily
chosen function which describes the horizontal profile (in twodimensional cartesian geometry) of the vertical magnetic field
component. In the present case this function is chosen to be


f 2
G (f ) = A · exp −
,
f0
where f0 is the so-called opening factor of the magnetic flux
tube. It should be noted that the magnetic field structure, designed by the approach outlined above, is divergence-free by
definition. This is a very important practical advantage for numerical studies, where keeping ∇ · B is a challenging task, see,
e.g., Tóth et al. (1998) and Tóth (2000). The corresponding density and gas pressure deviations from their non-magnetic equilibrium counterparts in the domain are calculated by assuming
the magneto-hydrostatic equilibrium condition, i.e.,
 2
B
(B · ∇) B + ∇
+ ∇p = ρg,
2
3

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20
4
Corona

3.0•105

4

0.1

Corona

0.1

Corona

0.1

4

0.1

4

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Corona

6

40

-2

1

Photosphere

Periodic driver

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
x [Mm] (158 grid points)

1.0•105

1

Chromosphere

1.0

10.0

0

-2

Photosphere

0

5.0•10

Photosphere

0

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
x [Mm] (158 grid points)

2 Transition region
Chromosphere

1.0

Periodic driver

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
x [Mm] (158 grid points)

20

10.0

1
100.0
0.0
100

4

Periodic driver

30

B0Z [Gauss]

2 Transition region

1
100.0
0.0
100

-4

1.5•105

z [Mm] (1976 grid points)

10.0

100.0
0.0
100

0

1.0

2
B0X [Gauss]

Chromosphere

T [K]

2 Transition region

z [Mm] (1976 grid points)

10.0

z [Mm] (1976 grid points)

log(P0) [N/m2 ]

z [Mm] (1976 grid points)

0

2.0•105

3

0.1

1.0

3

0.1

Chromosphere

3

0.1

2 Transition region

4

2.5•105

2

0.1

3

10

-4

100.0
0.0
100

-6

Photosphere

0

Periodic driver

0

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
x [Mm] (158 grid points)

Figure 3. Initial state of the computational configuration. The logarithm of the background pressure, log(P0 ) (a), the temperature, T (b), the magnetic field components,
B0x (c) and B0z (d) are shown. The z-axis corresponds to altitude and the x horizontal axis is parallel to the solar surface. The orange lines visualize the magnetic field
structure of the flux tube. The white lines are the iso-plasma-β contours, labeled by their values. The photosphere, chromosphere, transition region, and corona levels
are highlighted schematically in the plot. Also, the position of the periodic driver (red ellipse) is illustrated at the footpoint region.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

The driver is located at the footpoint region inside the flux tube
just under the height corresponding to the temperature minimum
of the solar atmosphere. The location is shown schematically in
Figure 3 as a small red ellipse. In all the simulations for this study
we have used a periodic driver with the frequency 33.3 mHz (or,
equivalently, with the period of Δt = 30 s), similar to acoustic
sources used by Bogdan et al. (2003), Hasan & van Ballegooijen
(2008), and Fedun et al. (2009). Theory predicts (e.g., Musielak
et al. 1994) a massive generation of high-frequency acoustic
waves in the sub-photospheric region of the Sun, but, according
to observational and numerical (one-dimensional) results of e.g.,
Fossum & Carlsson (2005), the acoustic energy flux created by
these waves is too low to contribute in a dominant way to solar
heating. Nevertheless, the generation of these high-frequency
waves is not yet settled and additional studies are needed. Highfrequency harmonic vertical and horizontal velocity drivers
allow us to simulate wave coupling of the photosphere and
corona. Further, analysis of these type of waves can be exploited
for diagnostic purposes giving a unique opportunity for insight
into sub-resolution properties of the solar wave guides. The Vx
and Vz components of the velocity perturbation have Gaussian
spatial profiles in the x and z directions,


 x−x 2  z−z 2 
2π t
0
0
,
(1)
Vx,z = A sin
exp− Δx + Δz
Δt

waves (FMAWs). Of course, due to the strong decrease of the
equilibrium density (see Figure 3), the sound speed changes
with height dramatically and modes may interchange their character. In addition to that, the implemented magnetic structure
imposes a change in the equilibrium density in both x and z directions. This latter feature results in additional changes to the
sound speed in both the vertical and the horizontal directions.
The local phase speeds for slow and fast MAWs also depend
on the angle between the direction of the wave propagation and
the magnetic field lines. According to MHD wave theory (see
the recent, excellent textbook by Goedbloed & Poedts 2004),
within the high plasma-β region (CS > VA ), SMAWs propagate
mainly along magnetic field lines with the local Alfvén speed
VA . The FMAW is allowed to propagate in any direction. Along
the direction of field lines the FMAW travels with the sound
speed CS and in the direction perpendicular
√ to the field lines it
propagates with the phase speed Vph = (CS2 + VA2 ).
On the other hand, within the region where the plasma-β is
low (VA > CS ), the MHD slow wave propagates approximately
with the local sound speed CS and the fast wave propagates with
the local Alfvén speed VA along the magnetic field lines. The
angular dependence for the phase speeds of the slow and fast
MAWs are identical in the high plasma-β region. Slow waves are
prohibited from traveling perpendicularly to the magnetic field
lines for both, high and low plasma-β regions. These well known
defining features are recalled in order to help us to interpret
the numerical results. Of course, in a structured and strongly
inhomogeneous (e.g., stratified) magnetized plasma the modes
are much harder to identify. They may be coupled to each other,
or may transform from one mode to another while traveling
through the medium.
In this paper, we analyze waves generated by the vertical and
horizontal drivers in particular regions of the solar atmosphere
that are side by side. We choose this principle of the presentation
to make it easier to compare the interaction of the oscillations
generated by these sources with the different regions of solar
atmosphere.
The time evolution of parallel (V ) and transverse (V⊥ )
components of the velocity produced by the vertical periodic

where A is the amplitude of the driver, x0 and z0 are the positions
of the source center in the x and z directions, respectively.
4. SIMULATIONS
In our two-dimensional numerical simulations, as it was described previously, we implemented rather realistic density and
temperature profiles. With such complicated flux tube structures
it is not easy to identify the different types of propagating waves.
Thus, we work with the velocity components perpendicular (V⊥ )
and parallel (V ) to the background magnetic field instead of the
velocity components defined in the Cartesian geometry. We suggest that the V component of the velocity corresponds mainly
to the slow magneto-acoustic waves (SMAWs) and the V⊥ component of the velocity corresponds to the fast magneto-acoustic
4

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 4. Snapshots of the field-aligned (V ) and transverse (V⊥ ) components of the velocity response showing the temporal development of the initial perturbation
generated by 30 s vertical periodic driver at different times in the open magnetic flux tube. The color scale shows the V and V⊥ perturbations in km s−1 at times given
in the bottom left corner of each pair of images. The color curves (i.e., white and orange) are same as on Figure 3. The angle and length of the white arrows correspond
to the velocity vector field.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

driver, specified by Equation (1), with amplitude A = 500 m s−1 ,
is shown in Figure 4. Illustrative snapshots are captured at times
t = 24, 171, 190, and 223 s, respectively. Note that we will also
use these time moments to show the simulation results with the
horizontal driver (see Figure 6).
In the high plasma-β region, where the sound speed is
greater than the Alfvén speed (CS  VA ), e.g., applicable in
photospheric and lower chromospheric regions, the generated
waves propagate linearly and isotropically with an increase in
amplitude due to the approximately constant sound speed CS
at the lower part of the computational domain (see two upper
panels of Figures 4 and 5). It is clear that the waves are strongly
acoustic in their character.
Next, we observe a very similar behavior of wave propagation
at the lower part of the computational domain for waves excited
by the horizontal periodic source (see Figures 6 and 7). It is
virtually impossible to distinguish between the slow and fast
waves at their initial stage in both types of simulation, as these
waves are fully coupled. On the other hand, the vertical source
of wave perturbations produces symmetric compressions and
decompressions of the plasma inside the flux tube. The values
of the relative pressure difference ΔP /P0 and temperature ΔT
perturbations are shown in Figure 5. After this initial stage
two waves (slow and fast), generated by vertical driver, can
be observed in the simulation domain. As is evident from the

snapshot taken at time t = 170 s (see upper right panel of
Figure 4), in the region where the plasma-β is bounded within
10 (lower end) to 1.0 (upper end), the V and V⊥ components
of the velocity have different amplitudes and slightly different
propagation angles.
The amplitude of V of the SMAW reaches approximately
6 km s−1 in the region below the TR from an initial value
of 0.5 km s−1 in the photosphere while the V⊥ amplitude
of the FMAW grows to the smaller value of 2.8 km s−1 .
Thus, the main part of wave energy produced by the vertical
periodic driver is carried along the central part of the magnetic
flux tube by the slow magneto-acoustic wave component. The
FMAW is not observed along the axis of the magnetic flux
tube. Since this latter wave propagates with a non-zero angle
to the tube axis, it can be mainly detected at the edges of
the flux tube. The propagation of the mainly longitudinal
FMAW is visible as a symmetric motion of the magnetic field
lines. In snapshots of the longitudinal V and the transversal
V⊥ velocity perturbations in Figure 4, it is apparent that
the position of the magnetic field lines (highlighted as the
orange lines in Figure 4) show symmetric expansions and
contractions of the magnetic flux tube. This change of the
magnetic flux tube diameter can be considered as an evidence
of the sausage mode generated by the periodic vertical driver
(see, e.g., Dorotovič et al. 2008), therefore we identify this
5

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 5. Snapshots of the relative pressure difference ΔP /P0 and temperature ΔT perturbation from the initial state in a magnetic flux tube at different times (same
as Figure 3). The color scale shows the relative difference of pressure and temperature (in K) perturbations. The magnetic field lines and iso-plasma-β contours are
the same as in Figure 3.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

wave mode as a sausage wave guided by the magnetic flux tube
structure.
Before analyzing our results regarding the horizontal driver,
we should recall the recent paper by Goossens et al. (2009) on
the nature of kink MHD waves in solar flux tubes. Goossens
et al. (2009) have confirmed that in a magnetic flux tube, kink
waves are incompressible waves with negligible pressure perturbations to a high degree of accuracy. In the central part of the
open flux tube (see Figure 6), where the magnetic field is strong,
we observe that the waves propagate upward with no noticeable gas or temperature perturbation (see Figure 7). We identify
these perturbations to be the kink FMAW, since they have the
same properties as described by Goossens et al. (2009). The amplitude of the initial perturbation of Vz (which in this particular
case is equal to V ) increases from 0.5 km s−1 up to 2 km s−1 ,
and V⊥ increases up to 0.7 km s−1 during the first few periods.
Therefore, similarly to the case of wave excitation by the
vertical driver, the wave energy may be transferred to the upper
part of solar atmosphere by longitudinal motions. This is an
important point in regard to which type of wave modes generated
by photospheric motions are most likely to supply energy for
plasma heating in the upper part of the solar atmosphere.
In the upper part of the chromosphere, where the plasma-β
is equal to or less than unity, all types of waves generated by

both types of drivers (see Figures 4 and 6) have changed their
character of propagation from linear to nonlinear. Hence, wave
fronts become sharper and resemble shocks as they propagate
upward into the region which has a stronger decrease in the
background density profile. Due to different phase speeds of
the waves, generated by the vertical and the horizontal drivers,
as we pointed out previously, the time at which the wave
perturbations penetrate and leak through the TR to the solar
corona are different. The lower left panel of Figure 4 shows the
moment of wave penetration into the solar corona (t ∼
=190 s).
On the right part of the panel, which depicts V⊥ , two shock-like
structures are observed just above the TR. These shocks have
similar circular shapes. On the left part of this panel (V ), at the
axis of the magnetic flux tube, we can clearly see only one shock
wave, which corresponds to the lower shock wave on the right
part (i.e., V⊥ ) of the panel. We suggest that the upper shock is
related to FMAW mode and the lower shock is a SMAW. These
two shocks have approximately the same maximum velocity
values.
The slow magneto-acoustic shock wave propagates along the
central part of the magnetic flux tube up to the coronal region. Opposite to that, the maximum amplitude of the fast
magneto-acoustic (shock) wave is localized in the TR (see
the lower left panel of Figure 4). Following this argument we
6

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 6. Same as Figure 4 but generated by 30 s periodic horizontal driver.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

comparison with the theory. Accordingly, as we have noted
previously, the horizontal driver (Figure 6) generates fast kink
MAWs at the central part of the tube. These type of waves
can be identified by asymmetric motions of the magnetic
field lines (orange lines in Figure 6) along the vertical, nonperturbed axis of the flux tube. The horizontal driver also
generates symmetric, compressible motions (see Figure 7),
similar to motions generated by the vertical driver, at the
periphery of the magnetic flux tube. These latter waves are
also FMAW, but do not displace the tube’s axis. Such type
of motion is visible in Figure 6 as a symmetric motion of
the magnetic field lines (the orange lines). We appreciate
that is difficult to identify the changes in magnetic field line
positions in the static images. Therefore, to help readers, we
also provided movies in a downloadable electronic format, that
can be found at http://swat.group.shef.ac.uk. We also found that
the largest portion of the wave energy is guided along the
peripheral parts of the open magnetic flux tube, in contrast
to the vertical driver case. In the coronal region, i.e., after
penetration through the TR, the amplitude of the MHD waves,
generated by the horizontal driver, reaches about 6.5 km s−1 .
This value is two times less than in the case of the vertical driver.

conclude that the main source of TR surface wave generation
is the fast magneto-acoustic mode, i.e., generated by horizontal
motions (see Figure 8). Note that in this figure only perturbations of the relative pressure difference (ΔP /P0 ) and temperature (ΔT ), zoomed out for better visibility, at the TR region are
shown.
In the lower right panel of Figure 6 we show the next stage of
wave propagation and evolution, captured at a representative
time of t = 223 s. The shock wave associated with the
slow magneto-acoustic mode (V ) propagates upwards with
an approximately constant shock amplitude of 15 km s−1 .
The amplitude of this velocity component is about 10 times
(i.e., an order of magnitude) greater than the amplitude of
the transversal velocity component V⊥ . This feature has an
important consequence for the energy propagation and supply
to the solar corona.
Also, both slow and fast MAWs carry some part of their
energy back to the photospheric region due to reflection from
the TR (Schunker & Cally 2006; Fedun et al. 2009).
Due to the structure of the magnetic configuration under
consideration, only the central part of the flux tube, where the
magnetic field is strong (along the z-axis), can be used for
7

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 7. Relative pressure difference ΔP /P0 and temperature ΔT perturbation from the initial state in the magnetic flux tube at different times. Wave excitation is
due to periodic horizontal motion. The color scale shows the relative difference of pressure and temperature perturbations. The colored (i.e., white and orange) curves
are the same as in Figure 5.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

Consequently, we can summarize that the energy is carried to
the upper layers of the solar atmosphere mainly by the waves
generated by vertical motions (see the lower right panel of
Figure 6).
Also, similar to the generation of surface waves by the
vertical driver, the horizontal motions at the photospheric region
have a strong influence on surface wave excitation in the TR.
To illustrate this, we have plotted a series of snapshots of
relative pressure difference (ΔP /P0 ) and temperature (ΔT )
perturbations at the TR at different representative times t = 234,
266, 288, and 317 s (see Figure 9).
The motions found in the TR have different features, i.e., they
are symmetric to the axis of the open magnetic flux tube in the
case of the vertical driver (see Figure 8), and they are asymmetric
(see Figure 9) in the case of the horizontal driver. However, the
amplitudes of the guided waves generated by the different types
of sources are similar. The vertical (V ) and the horizontal (V⊥ )
periodic motions produce variations of the temperature with
amplitudes up to 150,000 K in this thin layer. These variations
are approximately 10% of the temperature of the lower part of
the solar corona and therefore can perhaps be detected by the
currently available instruments.

To examine the dynamical processes in our simulations in
greater detail, we have plotted time–distance diagrams of the
parallel (V ) and the transverse (V⊥ ) components of velocity.
Figure 10 presents the simulation results in a different format.
The time–distance diagrams are useful for relatively accurate
measurements of the wave propagation speeds. As we have
shown above, both types of the photospheric drivers generate
the waves which, due to decoupling, can be resolved clearly
only in the low plasma-β region.
The upper and lower panels of Figure 10 are plotted for the
cases of vertical and horizontal driving sources, respectively.
The thin white lines in these plots correspond to the constant
plasma-β levels with the values of 100, 10, 1, and 0.1. We note,
that these time–distance diagrams are taken at x = 2.0 Mm, i.e.,
along the axis of the open magnetic flux tube.
During the first three driving periods, i.e., within the first
90 s of the simulation, the vertical and horizontal harmonic
sources produce linear waves, which propagate with an approximately constant speed of 11 km s−1 . After that, the
steepness of the wavefront starts increasing due to the background stratification of the model. The changes of the constant plasma-β contour shapes are observed in the upper
8

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 8. Time series of the relative pressure difference ΔP /P0 and temperature ΔT perturbation showing the development of a guided wave at the transition region
from the vertical harmonic source. Only the zoomed out portion centered around the transition region is shown in the plots.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

Figure 9. Same as Figure 8 but generated by the horizontal periodic driver (Equation (1)).
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

panels of Figure 10. These changes occur due to compression and rarefaction of the SMAW, as we have analyzed pre-

viously. There are no such variations in the perpendicular
component of the velocity V⊥ for either type of driver. The
9

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 10. Altitude vs. time rendering of transverse (V⊥ ) and field-aligned (V ) components of the velocity at x = 2.0 Mm, for vertical (upper panels) and transverse
driving of perturbations. The white lines show the altitude variations of selected iso-plasma-β contours with time, labeled by their appropriate value.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

steepening of the first SMAW, i.e., propagating speed, is faster
than that of the following compression waves (see the two upper
panels of Figure 10). No such behavior is observed for waves
generated by the horizontal driver. The phase speeds and the
amplitudes of slow and fast MAWs have increased after leaking
into the corona region.
The propagation speed, i.e., phase speed of the wave associated with V and generated by a vertical driver, reaches a value
equal to 26 km s−1 and has an amplitude 15 km s−1 . The waves
associated with V⊥ and generated by the same photospheric
driver travels in the coronal region much faster, with velocities
up to 100 km s−1 , but with a negligible value of amplitude, i.e.,
less than 0.5 km s−1 (along the axis of the tube). The phase
speeds of the waves excited by the horizontal driver are the
same as for the vertical driver due to their similar nature, but
their amplitudes are different. In the coronal region the value of
the V component increases up to 6.5 km s−1 and the value of
V⊥ up to 3 km s−1 . Wave reflection from the TR at x = 2.0 Mm
is clearly visible on the time–distance diagrams in the V and
V⊥ components of the velocity for the horizontal driver.
Next, we construct the time–distance diagrams for both the
V and V⊥ velocity components in the horizontal direction at
different heights of the solar atmosphere. The full movies of
the phase speed variation with height, i.e., the evolution of

the generated waves in the computational domain, are again
available at the Web site http://swat.group.shef.ac.uk.
Figures 11 and 12 are the ω–k diagrams of the V and
V⊥ velocity components at representative heights 0.85 Mm
and 1.5 Mm, respectively. The upper and lower panels of
Figures 11 and 12 correspond to the wave spectrum generated
in the computational domain by the vertical and horizontal
drivers, respectively. The left and right panels in both figures
correspond to the vertical (V ) and horizontal (V⊥ ) components
of the velocity. Figure 11 (i.e., the spectrum taken at 0.85 Mm)
allows us to see and interpret clearly the signature of standing
modes being set up within the chromospheric cavity (see Erdélyi
et al. 2007) generated by both vertical (two upper panels) and
horizontal (two lower panels) drivers.
For waves excited by a strongly localized driver (e.g., point
source) this will produce single dots only in an ω–k diagrams
that correspond to different harmonics of the standing mode.
In our simulations we have used a velocity perturbation driver
with Gaussian spatial profiles in the x and z directions (see
Equation (1)). Such a source has a wide power spectrum, thus in
our ω–k diagrams the standing modes appear as wider horizontal
lines. The localized horizontal areas with the high signal power
settle along a straight line, which is due to the approximately
constant sound speed (see Figure 2) in the lower part of the
10

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 11. ω–k diagrams of the V and V⊥ velocity components taken along the horizontal cross section at the chromosphere region, i.e., at 0.85 Mm in the vertical
direction. The upper and lower panels correspond to the V and V⊥ velocity components generated by the vertical and horizontal photospheric drivers defined by
Equation (1), respectively.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

to standing modes is increasing with wave number due to the
influence of the cavity produced by the open flux tube (see
Figure 12). Also, Figure 12 (see the left and the right lower
parts) shows the presence of propagating slow and fast waves
generated by the photospheric horizontal driver, which can be
identified in the ω–k diagrams as two straight ridges. These
ridges have a different inclination to the wave number axis k,
so they correspond to waves propagating with different phase
speeds. Only one ridge is observed at 1.5 Mm with the vertical
driver (see the two upper panels of Figure 12).
Next, snapshots of the dispersion diagrams taken below the
transition region (i.e., at heights h = 1.8 Mm and 1.85 Mm)
and in the solar coronal region (i.e., at heights h = 2.53 and
3.03 Mm), are shown in Figures 13 and 14 are shown. In these
parts of the computational domain magnetic field lines of the
open flux tube (see Figure 3) are dominantly vertical. Thus,
horizontal cross sections (which we have used to construct
the time–distance and ω–k diagrams) are perpendicular to the
magnetic field lines. In the lower part of the computational
domain, the horizontal cross sections have various angles to the

computational domain in the horizontal direction along which
the spectrum is calculated. The wave spectrum generated by
vertical driver of ∼33.3 mHz contains evidence of the higher
harmonics at ∼66.6, 100 mHz, and so on (see two upper
panels of Figure 11). In the case of wave excitation by the
horizontal driver (see the two lower panels of Figure 11) we
can observe only four harmonics (at 33.3, ∼66.6, ∼100, and
∼133 mHz) at the chromospheric region. The area covered by
higher harmonics of standing modes driven by the vertical driver
is much larger than the corresponding area in the ω–k diagrams
computed for the case of the horizontal driver. Therefore, we
suggest that vertical motions are responsible for the formation
of the standing mode pattern within the chromospheric cavity.
Figure 12 demonstrates the wave spectrum at the upper part of
the chromosphere, i.e., at height equal to 1.5 Mm. In the central
part of the flux tube, where the magnetic field is strong, the
sound speed has a minimum value (see Figure 2). The plasma-β
in this region is ∼10, therefore the magnetic flux tube starts
to work as a cavity in a horizontal direction. Notably, at a
height of 1.5 Mm the gradient of the signals corresponding
11

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

Figure 12. Same as Figure 11 but the velocity components are taken along the horizontal cross section at the vertical height 1.5 Mm.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

Due to the wave reflection from the transition region and
mode conversion within the plasma-β ∼ 1 region, we can
see propagating waves with different phase speeds (see the
four left snapshots of Figure 13 for representative heights
h = 1.8 Mm and 1.85 Mm). The process of mode conversion
within the plasma-β ∼ 1 region has been previously studied
analytically and semi-analytically for non-realistic models by,
e.g., Zhugzhda (1979), Cally (2001, 2007), and others. The
enhanced power at certain frequencies is caused by partial
reflections from the steep temperature and density profiles at
the transition region in combination with the cavity. The pattern
is observed in both the vertical (the upper four panels) and
horizontal (the lower four panels) components of the velocity. As
was mentioned previously, the energy carried by the horizontal
component has its main impact on the guided waves in the
transition region. Also, in the snapshot at h = 1.86 (see the
second upper panel of Figure 13) the two types of ridges,
indicated by the different gradients to the k-axis appear at the
same location.
In the coronal region (see four snapshots in the right part of
Figure 13 for the typical heights h = 2.53 Mm and 3.03 Mm),
only one ridge is observed. The phase speed of the propagating
wave is approximately constant and equal to ∼100 km s−1 ,

magnetic field lines of the magnetic flux tube due to a curvature
of the constructed magnetic field.
Because of this, interpretation of the ω–k diagrams where
the magnetic field lines are not straight, i.e., in the photosphere
and lower chromosphere regions, is not a straightforward task.
In our simulations the region where the plasma-β is equal to
unity is located just under the transition region, where the solar
atmosphere has a steep temperature gradient. Figure 13 depicts
the power spectrum and phase speeds of the waves generated
by the photospheric vertical driver in this region. The four
upper panels captured for the V velocity component while the
four lower panels are plots of the V⊥ velocity component. The
presence of a number of ridges in this region can be explained
from a magneto-seismological point of view. In our case, density
in the region below the transition region and, thus the sound
speed (see Figure 2), changes not only in the vertical z-direction
(see Figure 1) but also in the horizontal x-direction. In Figure 13
we can clearly observe the signature of eigenmodes similar to
the spectrum of solar acoustic oscillations. We suppose this
ridge pattern was excited because the background model we use
represents a cavity, bounded by the magnetic flux tube walls, in
some way resembling a cavity, created by the upper and lower
turning points in the solar interior.
12

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

Figure 13. ω–k diagrams of the vertical V and horizontal V⊥ velocity components in the transition and solar corona regions. Fourier transform performed on
time–distance series are taken at heights h = 1.8, 1.85, 2.53, and 3.03 Mm. The four panels are the ω–k diagrams of V and V⊥ velocity components excited by vertical
photospheric driver (Equation (1)) in each row, respectively.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

Figure 14. Same as Figure 13 but the V and V⊥ velocity components are now generated by a horizontal photospheric driver.
(A color version of this figure is available in the online journal.)

Figure 12). Thus, we can deduce that the vertical driver more
strongly excites the eigenmodes near the transition region within
the semi-circular shaped cavity.

slightly increasing with height. This is the same order of
magnitude that has been observed with CoMP (see, e.g.,
Tomczyk & McIntosh 2009).
In Figure 14 we show a series ω–k diagrams taken at the
same heights as the diagrams described above but for V and
V⊥ velocity components generated by a horizontal photospheric
driver. Opposite to the previous case of wave generation by the
vertical driver, the wave spectrum pattern within the transition
region, excited by the horizontal driver, mainly keeps the
structure of the wave spectrum in the upper chromosphere (see

5. CONCLUSIONS
In the present paper, we have made an attempt to numerically
simulate wave generation and propagation in an open magnetic
flux tube. It has been shown that standing modes within the
chromospheric cavity are generated mainly by vertical motions
13

The Astrophysical Journal, 727:17 (14pp), 2011 January 20

Fedun, Shelyag, & Erdélyi

at the footpoint of an open magnetic flux tube. Regardless
of the driver direction, the largest proportion of energy is
carried to the corona via the V velocity component. It was
also shown that the surface waves generated at the TR have
most of their power in the perpendicular velocity component
V⊥ , irrespective of whether the driver is horizontal or vertical.
Hence, the oscillatory response of the flux tube at the TR and
above in the corona is weakly dependent on whether the velocity
of the driver is parallel or perpendicular to the direction of
the magnetic field at the footpoint. These facts have important
implications for high spatial and temporal observations of lower
atmospheric flux tubes by, e.g., Hinode, ROSA, and the planned
ATST, suggesting that the oscillatory response of such flux tubes
should be similarly independent of photospheric driver, e.g., the
previously mentioned TR surface waves and dominant vertical
velocity component power.
Unfortunately, we cannot yet compare our results directly
with the time–distance and FFT analysis of the CoMP observational data (Tomczyk & McIntosh 2009) for a number of reasons.
Firstly, the spatial resolution of CoMP is 9 arcsec, which is about
6.5 Mm. In our simulations we have used a numerical domain
of 4 Mm × 4 Mm, thus CoMP cannot resolve the fine spatial
structure generated in our model. Second, the S/N of the CoMP
instrument decreases with frequency and at the frequency above
5 mHz the level of noise is comparable with the signal, and in
our case the frequency is well above this range. In our paper,
we have analyzed the dependence of ω and the perpendicular
wavenumber whereas Tomczyk & McIntosh (2009) estimated
the wavenumber parallel to observing magnetic field. However,
it is possible to carry out such a study with our present data
and this will be the subject of future work. Future work will
also include non-adiabatic effects, such as radiative losses from
coronal shocks, and a detailed non-ideal equation of state. Another possibility would be to reduce the spatial resolution of
our numerical domain and, thus, increase the physical size of
the solar atmospheric model. Either way, the present paper is a
step toward the wider interpretation of CoMP (and other coronal
wave) observations and we hope giving here impetus to design
further such important parallel to observing campaigns.

Cargill, P. J., Spicer, D. S., & Zalesak, S. T. 1997, ApJ, 488, 854
Carlsson, M., & Bogdan, T. J. 2006, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 364, 395
Caunt, S. E., & Korpi, M. J. 2001, A&A, 369, 706
Deinzer, W. 1965, ApJ, 141, 548
De Moortel, I. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 149, 65
De Pontieu, B., & Erdélyi, R. 2006, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 364, 383
De Pontieu, B., Erdélyi, R., & De Moortel, I. 2005, ApJ, 624, L61
De Pontieu, B., Erdélyi, R., & James, S. P. 2004, Nature, 430, 536
Dı́az, A. J., & Roberts, B. 2006, A&A, 458, 975
Dorotovič, I., Erdélyi, R., & Karlovský, V. 2008, in IAU Symp. 247, Identification of Linear Slow Sausage Waves in Magnetic Pores, ed. R. Erdélyi & C.
A. Mendoza-Briceño (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 351
Erdélyi, R. 2006, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 364, 351
Erdélyi, R., & Fedun, V. 2007, Science, 318, 1572
Erdélyi, R., Malins, C., Tóth, G., & De Pontieu, B. 2007, A&A, 467, 1299
Erdélyi, R., & Taroyan, Y. 2008, A&A, 489, L49
Fedun, V., Erdélyi, R., & Shelyag, S. 2009, Sol. Phys., 258, 219
Fossum, A., & Carlsson, M. 2005, Nature, 435, 919
Goedbloed, J. P. H., & Poedts, S. 2004, Principles of Magnetohydrodynamics
(Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press)
Goossens, M., Terradas, J., Andries, J., Arregui, I., & Ballester, J. L. 2009, A&A,
503, 213
Gordovskyy, M., & Jain, R. 2007, ApJ, 661, 586
Hasan, S. S., & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2008, ApJ, 680, 1542
Hasan, S. S., van Ballegooijen, A. A., Kalkofen, W., & Steiner, O. 2005, ApJ,
631, 1270
Keppens, R., Nool, M., Tóth, G., & Goedbloed, J. P. 2003, Comput. Phys.
Commun., 153, 317
Khomenko, E., & Collados, M. 2006, ApJ, 653, 739
Khomenko, E., Collados, M., & Felipe, T. 2008, Sol. Phys., 251, 589
Kuridze, D., Zaqarashvili, T. V., Shergelashvili, B. M., & Poedts, S. 2009, A&A,
505, 763
Mathioudakis, M., Jess, D. B., & Erdélyi, R. 2011, Space Sci. Rev., submitted
McWhirter, R., Thonemann, P., & Wilson, R. 1975, A&A, 40, 63
Musielak, Z. E., Rosner, R., Stein, R. F., & Ulmschneider, P. 1994, ApJ, 423,
474
Ofman, L. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 149, 153
Ruderman, M. S., & Erdélyi, R. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 149, 199
Ruderman, M. S., Verth, G., & Erdélyi, R. 2008, ApJ, 686, 694
Schunker, H., & Cally, P. S. 2006, MNRAS, 372, 551
Schüssler, M., & Rempel, M. 2005, A&A, 441, 337
Schlüter, A., & Temesváry, S. 1958, in IAU Symp. 6, Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical Physics, ed. B. Lehnert (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press), 263
Scullion, E., Erdélyi, R., Fedun, V., & Doyle, J. 2010, ApJ, submitted
Shelyag, S., Fedun, V., & Erdélyi, R. 2008, A&A, 486, 655
Shelyag, S., Mathioudakis, M., Keenan, F. P., & Jess, D. B. 2010, A&A, 515,
A107
Shelyag, S., Zharkov, S., Fedun, V., Erdélyi, R., & Thompson, M. J. 2009, A&A,
501, 735
Stein, R. F., & Nordlund, A. 1998, ApJ, 499, 914
Taroyan, Y., & Erdélyi, R. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 149, 229
Tomczyk, S., & McIntosh, S. W. 2009, ApJ, 697, 1384
Tóth, G. 1996, Astrophys. Lett. Commun., 34, 245
Tóth, G. 2000, J. Comput. Phys., 161, 605
Tóth, G., Keppens, R., & Botchev, M. A. 1998, A&A, 332, 1159
Vernazza, J. E., Avrett, E. H., & Loeser, R. 1981, ApJS, 45, 635
Verth, G., & Erdélyi, R. 2008, A&A, 486, 1015
Verth, G., Erdélyi, R., & Goossens, M. 2010, ApJ, 714, 1637
Verth, G., Erdélyi, R., & Jess, D. B. 2008, ApJ, 687, L45
Vögler, A., Shelyag, S., Schüssler, M., Cattaneo, F., Emonet, T., & Linde, T.
2005, A&A, 429, 335
Zaqarashvili, T. V., & Skhirtladze, N. 2008, ApJ, 683, L91
Zhugzhda, Y. D. 1979, SvA, 23, 42

The authors thank The University of Sheffield (UK), Queen’s
University Belfast (UK), and STFC (UK) for the financial
support they received. R.E. acknowledges M. Kéray for patient
encouragement and is grateful to NSF, Hungary (OTKA, Ref.
No. K67746).
REFERENCES
Andries, J., van Doorsselaere, T., Roberts, B., Verth, G., Verwichte, E., &
Erdélyi, R. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 149, 3
Banerjee, D., Erdélyi, R., Oliver, R., & O’Shea, E. 2007, Sol. Phys., 246, 3
Bogdan, T. J., et al. 2003, ApJ, 599, 626
Cally, P. S. 2001, ApJ, 548, 473
Cally, P. S. 2007, Astron. Nachr., 328, 286

14

