Helioseismology
Jørgen Christensen-Dalsgaard
High Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, USA,
Teoretisk Astrofysik Center, Danmarks Grundforskningsfond, and
Institut for Fysik og Astronomi, Aarhus Universitet, DK 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark∗

arXiv:astro-ph/0207403v1 18 Jul 2002

(Submitted: 9 November 2001. Revised: 4 April 2002. Scheduled for publication in Rev. Mod. Phys., Oct. 2002)

3. Solar g modes?
C. Helioseismic inversion
1. Principles of inversion
2. Inversion for solar rotation
3. Inversion for solar structure
VII. Helioseismic investigation of solar structure
A. Inferences of sound speed and density
B. Physics and composition of the solar interior
C. Helioseismology and the solar neutrino problem
VIII. Inferences of solar internal rotation
IX. The changing, aspherical Sun
X. Local helioseismology
A. Ring-diagram analysis
B. Time-distance analysis and helioseismic
holography
XI. The helioseismic Sun
XII. Per aspera ad astra
Acknowledgments
References

Oscillations detected on the solar surface provide a unique possibility for investigations of the interior properties of a star. Through
major observational efforts, including extensive observations from
space, as well as development of sophisticated tools for the analysis and interpretation of the data, we have been able to infer the
large-scale structure and rotation of the solar interior with substantial accuracy, and we are beginning to get information about
the complex subsurface structure and dynamics of sunspot regions,
which dominate the magnetic activity in the solar atmosphere and
beyond. The results provide a detailed test of the modeling of stellar structure and evolution, and hence of the physical properties
of matter assumed in the models. In this way the basis for using
stellar modeling in other branches of science is very substantially
strengthened; an important example is the use of observations of
solar neutrinos to constrain the properties of the neutrino.

CONTENTS
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Introduction
Early history of helioseismology
Overall properties of the Sun
Solar structure and evolution
A. ‘Standard’ solar models
B. Solar neutrinos
C. The rotation of the Sun
D. Solar magnetic activity
V. Stellar oscillations
A. Equations and boundary conditions
1. Some basic hydrodynamics
2. The linear approximation
3. Equations of linear adiabatic stellar
oscillations
B. Properties of oscillations
C. Asymptotic behavior of stellar oscillations
1. Properties of acoustic modes
2. A proper asymptotic treatment
3. Asymptotic properties of p modes
4. f and g modes
D. Variational principle
E. Effects of rotation
F. The causes of solar oscillations
VI. Observation of solar oscillation
A. Observing techniques
B. Analysis of oscillation data
1. Spatial analysis
2. Temporal analysis

∗

1
2
4
4
4
7
8
9
9
9
9
10

25
25
25
27
27
28
28
30
32
33
35
38
38
40
42
44
45
45

I. INTRODUCTION

By the standards of astrophysics, stars are relatively
well understood. Modelling of stellar evolution has explained, or at least accounted for, many of the observed
properties of stars. Stellar models are computed on the
basis of the assumed physical conditions in stellar interiors, including the thermodynamical properties of stellar
matter, the interaction between matter and radiation and
the nuclear reactions that power the stars. By following the changes in structure as the stars evolve through
the fusion of lighter elements into heavier, starting with
hydrogen being turned into helium, the models predict
how the observable properties of the stars change as they
age. These predictions can then be compared to observations. Important examples are the distributions of stars
in terms of surface temperature and luminosity, particularly for stellar clusters where the stars, having presumably been formed in the same interstellar cloud, can be
assumed to share the same age and original composition.
These distributions are generally in reasonable agreement
with the models; the comparison between observations
and models furthermore provides estimates of the ages of
the clusters, of considerable interest to the understanding
of the evolution of the Galaxy. Additional tests, generally quite satisfactory, are provided in the relatively few

10
12
13
13
14
15
17
17
18
19
20
21
22
22
23

Permanent address. Electronic address: jcd@phys.au.dk

1

cases where stellar masses can be determined with reasonable accuracy from the motion of stars in binary systems. Such successes give some confidence in the use of
stellar models in other areas of astrophysics. These include studies of element synthesis in late stages of stellar
evolution, the use of supernova explosions as ‘standard
candles’ in cosmology, and estimates of the primordial
element composition from stellar observations.
An important aspect of stellar astrophysics is the use
of stars as physics laboratories. Since the basic properties of stars and their modeling are presumed to be
relatively well established, one may hope to use more
detailed observations to provide information about the
physics of stellar interiors, to the extent that it is reflected in observable properties. This is of obvious interest: conditions in the interiors of stars are generally far
more extreme, in terms of temperature and density, than
achievable under controlled circumstances in terrestrial
laboratories. Thus sufficiently detailed stellar data might
offer the hope of providing information on the properties
of matter under these conditions.
Yet in reality there is little reason to be complacent
about the status of stellar astrophysics. Most observations relevant to stellar interiors provide only limited
constraints on the detailed properties of the stars. Where
more extensive information is becoming available, such as
determinations of detailed surface abundances, the models often fail to explain it. Furthermore, the models are
in fact extremely simple, compared to the potential complexities of stellar interiors. In particular, convection,
which dominates energy transport in parts of most stars,
is treated very crudely while other potential hydrodynamical instabilities are generally neglected. Also stellar
rotation is rarely taken into account, yet could have important effects on the evolution. These limitations could
have profound effects on, for example, the modeling of
late stages of stellar evolution, which depend sensitively
on the composition profile established during the life of
the star.
The Sun offers an example of a star that can be studied in very great detail. Furthermore, it is a relatively
simple star: it is in the middle of its life, with approximately half the original central abundance of hydrogen
having been used, and, compared to some other stars,
the physical conditions in the solar interior are relatively
benign. Thus in principle the Sun provides an ideal case
for testing the theory of stellar evolution.
In practice, the success of such tests was for a long
time somewhat doubtful. Solar modeling depends on
two unknown parameters: the initial helium abundance
and a parameter characterizing the efficacy of convective
energy transport near the solar surface. These parameters can be adjusted to provide a model of solar mass,
matching the solar radius and luminosity at the age of the
Sun. Given this calibration, however, the measured sur-

face properties of the Sun provide no independent test of
the model. Furthermore, two potentially severe problems
with solar models have been widely considered. One, the
so-called faint early Sun problem, resulted from the realization that solar models predicted that the initial luminosity of the Sun, at the start of hydrogen fusion, was
approximately 70 per cent of the present value, yet geological evidence indicated that there had been no major
change in the climate of the Earth over the past 3.5 Gyr
(e.g., Sagan and Mullen, 1972).1 This change in luminosity is a fundamental effect of the conversion of hydrogen to helium and the resulting change in solar structure; thus the attempts to eliminate it resorted to rather
drastic measures, such as suggestions for changes to the
gravitational constant. As noted by Sagan and Mullen,
a far more likely explanation is a readjustment of conditions in the Earth’s atmosphere to compensate for the
change in luminosity. A more serious concern was the
fact that attempts to detect the neutrinos created by the
fusion reactions in the solar core found values far below
the predictions. This evidently raised doubts about the
computations of solar models, and hence on the general
understanding of stellar evolution, and led to a number
of suggestions for changing the models such as to bring
them into agreement with the neutrino measurements.
The last three decades have seen a tremendous growth
in our information about the solar interior, through the
detection and extensive observation of oscillations of the
solar surface. Analyses of these oscillations, appropriately termed helioseismology, have resulted in extremely
precise and detailed information about the properties of
the solar interior, rivaling or in some respects exceeding
our knowledge about the interior of the Earth.
II. EARLY HISTORY OF HELIOSEISMOLOGY

The development of helioseismology has to a large extent been driven by observations. Hence in the following
I provide an overview of the evolution of observations
of solar oscillations. Discussions of the development of
helioseismic inferences follow in later sections.
It is possible that the first indications of solar oscillations were detected by Plaskett (1916), who observed
fluctuations in the solar surface Doppler velocity in measurements of the solar rotation rate. It was not clear,
however, whether the fluctuations were truly solar or
whether they were induced by effects in the Earth’s atmosphere. The solar origin of these fluctuations was established by Hart (1954, 1956). However, the first definite

1

The change in luminosity was noted by Schwarzschild (1958) who speculated about possible geological
consequences.

2

for the development of helioseismology.
(For the present author, the announcement by Hill was
particularly significant. It took place at a conference in
Cambridge in the Summer of 1975. I was engaged, with
Douglas Gough, in modeling solar structure and oscillations, as part of an investigation of mixing induced by
oscillations as a possible explanation of the solar neutrino problem. As a result, we had available solar models and programmes for computing their frequencies. Hill
presented an observed spectrum and I was able, the following day, to compare it with frequencies computed for
a model; the agreement was quite striking. It has since
transpired that the observations had little to do with
global oscillations of the Sun; and the model was surely
far too crude for such a comparison. Even so, the event
was a major personal turning point, directing my scientific efforts towards helioseismology.)
The next major observational step was the identification by Claverie et al. (1979) of modal structure of
five-minute oscillations in Doppler-velocity observations
in light integrated over the solar disk. Such observations
are sensitive only to oscillations of the lowest sphericalharmonic degree, and hence these were the first confirmed
detection of truly global modes of oscillations. The frequency pattern, with regularly spaced peaks, matched
theoretical predictions based on the asymptotic theory
of acoustic modes of high radial order (ChristensenDalsgaard and Gough, 1980a; see also Section V.C.3).
Further observations, with much higher frequency resolution, were made from the Geographical South Pole during the austral summer 1979–80 (Grec et al., 1980); these
resolved the individual multiplets in the low-degree spectrum and allowed a comparison between the frequency
data, including also the so-called small frequency separation, and solar models. The structure of the frequency
spectrum was analyzed asymptotically by Tassoul (1980).
It was pointed out by Gough (1982) that the small separation was related to the curvature of sound speed in the
solar core; thus it would, for example, provide evidence
for mixing of material in the core (see Section V.C.3).
The existence of oscillations in the five-minute range,
both a low degree as detected by Claverie et al. (1979)
and at high wavenumbers as found by Deubner (1975),
strongly suggested a common cause (e.g., ChristensenDalsgaard and Gough, 1982). The gap between these
observations was filled by Duvall and Harvey (1983), who
made detailed observations at intermediate degree. This
also allowed a definite identification of the order of the
modes, even at low degree, by establishing the connection
with the high-degree modes for which the order could be
directly determined. By providing a full range of modes
these and subsequent observations opened the possibilities for detailed inferences of properties of the solar interior, such as the internal solar rotation (Duvall et al.,
1984) and the sound speed (Christensen-Dalsgaard et al.,

observations of oscillations of the solar surface were made
by Leighton et al. (1962). They detected roughly periodic oscillations in local Doppler velocity with periods
of around 300 s and a lifetime of at most a few periods. Strikingly, they noted the potential for using the
observed period to probe the properties of the solar atmosphere. A confirmation of the initial detection of the
oscillations was made by Evans and Michard (1962). The
observations by Leighton et al. (1962) also led to the detection of convective motion on supergranular scales. As
discussed in section X.B, the study of solar oscillations
and supergranulation has recently come together again.
Early observations of the five-minute oscillations were
of short duration and limited spatial extent. With only
such information, the oscillations were generally interpreted as local phenomena in the solar atmosphere, of
limited spatial and temporal coherence, possibly waves
induced by penetrating convection (e.g., Bahng and
Schwarzschild, 1963). However, attempts at determining their structure were made by several authors, including Frazier (1968); through observations and Fourier
transforms of the oscillations as a function of position
and time, he could make power spectra as a function of
wavenumber and frequency, showing some localization of
power. Such observations indicated a less superficial nature of the oscillations, and inspired major theoretical
advances in the understanding of their nature: Ulrich
(1970) and Leibacher and Stein (1971) proposed that
the observations resulted from standing acoustic waves
in the solar interior. Such calculations were further developed by Wolff (1972) and Ando and Osaki (1975),
who found that oscillations in the relevant frequency and
wavenumber range may be linearly unstable. However,
the definite breakthrough were the observations by Deubner (1975) which for the first time identified ridges in
the wavenumber-frequency diagram, reflecting the modal
structure of the oscillations. Similar observations were
reported by Rhodes et al. (1977), who furthermore compared the frequencies with computed models to obtain
constraints on the properties of the solar convection zone.
The year of 1975 was indeed the annus mirabilis of
helioseismology. An important event was the announcement by H. A. Hill of the detection of oscillations in the
apparent solar diameter (see Hill et al., 1976; Brown et
al., 1978). This was the first suggestion of truly global oscillations of the Sun and immediately indicated the possibility of using such data to investigate the properties of
the solar interior (e.g., Scuflaire et al., 1975; ChristensenDalsgaard and Gough, 1976; Iben and Mahaffy, 1976;
Rouse, 1977). Simultaneously, Brookes et al. (1976) and
Severny et al. (1976) announced independent detections
of a solar oscillation with a period of 160 min, with similarly interesting diagnostic potentials. Even though these
detections have since been found to be of likely non-solar
origin, they played a very important role as inspiration

3

tions that the beryllium abundance is lower also, but the
most recent determinations seems to indicate that the
solar beryllium abundance is similar to the meteoritic
value (e.g., Balachandran and Bell, 1998). As discussed
in Section XI these observations are of great interest in
connection with investigations of solar internal structure
and dynamics.
The noble gases, including helium, do not have lines
in the photospheric spectrum as a result of the large excitation energies of the relevant atomic transitions. It
is true that helium can be detected in the solar spectrum, but only through lines formed high in the solar
atmosphere where conditions are complex and uncertain
and a reliable abundance determination is therefore not
possible. As a result, the solar helium abundance is not
known from ‘classical’ observations. Typically, the initial abundance Y0 by mass is used as a free parameter
in solar-model calculations. On the other hand, spectroscopic data do provide a measure of the ratio Zs /Xs of
the present surface abundances heavy elements and hydrogen; commonly used values are 0.0245 (Grevesse and
Noels, 1993) and 0.023 (Grevesse and Sauval, 1998).
Solar surface rotation can be determined by following
the motion of features on the solar surface (e.g., sunspots)
as they move across the solar disk, or through Doppler
measurements. The angular velocity Ω obtained from
Doppler measurements, as a function of co-latitude θ,
can be fitted by the following relation

1985).
III. OVERALL PROPERTIES OF THE SUN

The Sun is unique amongst stars in that its properties are known with high precision. The product GM⊙ ,
where G is the gravitational constant and M⊙ is the
mass of the Sun, is known with very high accuracy
from planetary motion. Thus the factor limiting the
accuracy of M⊙ is the value of G; the commonly used
value is M⊙ = 1.989 × 1033 g. The solar radius R⊙
follows from the apparent diameter and the distance
to the Sun. Most recent computations of solar models have used R⊙ = 6.9599 × 1010 cm (Auwers, 1891).2
The solar luminosity L⊙ is determined from satellite irradiance measurements, suitably averaged over the variation of around 0.1 % during the solar cycle (e.g., Willson and Hudson, 1991; Pap and Fröhlich, 1999); a commonly used value is L⊙ = 3.846 × 1033 erg s−1 . Finally,
the age of the Sun is obtained from age determinations
for meteorites, combined with modeling of the formation history of the solar system (e.g., Guenther, 1989;
Wasserburg, in Bahcall and Pinsonneault, 1995). Based
on a careful analysis, Wasserburg estimated the age as
t⊙ = (4.566 ± 0.005) × 109 yr.
The composition of stellar matter is traditionally characterized by the relative abundances by mass X, Y and
Z of hydrogen, helium and ‘heavy elements’ (i.e., elements heavier than helium). The solar surface composition can in principle be determined from spectroscopic
analysis. In practice, the principle works for most elements heavier than helium; for elements with lines in the
solar photospheric spectrum, abundances can be determined with reasonable precision, although often limited
by uncertainties in the relevant basic atomic parameters
and in the modeling of the solar atmosphere (e.g., Asplund et al., 2000b), as well as by blending with weak
lines (e.g., Allende Prieto et al., 2001). The relative
abundances so obtained are generally in good agreement
with solar-system abundances as inferred from meteorites
(e.g., Anders and Grevesse, 1989; Grevesse and Sauval,
1998). A striking exception is the abundance of lithium,
which is lower by about a factor 150, relative to silicon,
in the Sun than in meteorites. There have been sugges-

Ω
= 451.5 nHz − 65.3 nHz cos2 θ − 66.7 nHz cos4 θ (1)
2π
(Ulrich et al., 1988), although there are significant departures from this relation, as well as variations with time
(see also Section IX).
IV. SOLAR STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION
A. ‘Standard’ solar models

As a background for the discussion of the helioseismically inferred information about the solar internal structure, it is useful briefly to summarize the principles of
computation of ‘standard’ solar models.3 Such models
are assumed to be spherically symmetric, ignoring effects of rotation and magnetic field. In that case, the
basic equations of stellar structure can be written

2

Brown & Christensen-Dalsgaard (1998) obtained the value
of (695.508 ± 0.026) Mm from a careful analysis of daily timings at noon of solar transits with a telescope fixed in the direction of the meridian, combined with modeling of the limb
intensity; this value refers to the solar photosphere, defined
as the point where the temperature equals the effective temperature. This value has not yet been used for detailed solar
modeling, however.

3

Further discussion of such models, and detailed results,
have been provided by, for example, Bahcall and Pinsonneault
(1992, 1995), Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1996), Brun et al.
(1998), and Bahcall et al. (2001).

4

dp
dr
dm
dr
dT
dr
dL
dr

=−

Gmρ
,
r2

= 4πr2 ρ ,

effects that changed the composition. However, Noerdlinger (1977) pointed out the potential importance of
diffusion of helium in the Sun. Strong evidence for the
importance of diffusion and settling has since come from
helioseismology (see Section VII.A) and these processes
are now generally included in the calculations.5 Specifically, the rate of change of the hydrogen abundance is
written



∂X
∂X
1 ∂
2
r ρ DH
= RH + 2
+ VH X
; (5)
∂t
r ρ ∂r
∂r

(2a)
(2b)

T dp
,
p dr
 


p dρ
d u
2
+
.
= 4πr ρǫ − ρ
dt ρ
ρ dt

=∇

(2c)
(2d)

Here r is distance to the center, p is pressure, m is the
mass of the sphere interior to r, ρ is density, T is temperature, L is the flow of energy per unit time through
the sphere of radius r, ǫ is the rate of nuclear energy
generation per unit mass and time, and u is the internal
energy per unit volume.4 Also, the temperature gradient
has been characterized by ∇ = d ln T /d ln p and is determined by the mode of energy transport. Where energy is
transported by radiation, ∇ = ∇rad , where the radiative
gradient is given by
∇rad =

3
κp L(r)
;
16πac̃G T 4 m(r)

here RH is the rate of change in the hydrogen abundance
from nuclear reactions, DH is the diffusion coefficient and
VH is the settling speed. Similar equations are of course
satisfied for the abundances of other elements. In Eq. (5),
the term in DH ∂X/∂r tends to smooth out composition
gradients, whereas the term in the settling velocity leads
to separation, hydrogen rising towards the surface and
heavier elements including helium sinking towards the
interior.
The basic equations of stellar structure and evolution,
Eqs (2) and (5), are relatively simple; also, the numerical techniques for solving them are well established and
well tested in the case of solar models. However, the apparent simplicity hides a great deal of complexity, often
combined under the heading of ‘microphysics’. To complete the equations, their right-hand sides must be expressed in terms of the basic variables {p, m, T, L, Xi },
where Xi denotes the abundances of the relevant elements. This requires expressions for the density ρ and
other thermodynamic variables, for the opacity κ, for
the energy generation rate ǫ and the rates of change of
composition Ri , as well as for the diffusion and settling
coefficients. At the level of precision required for solar
modeling, each of these components involves substantial
physical subtleties. The thermodynamic quantities are
obtained from an equation of state, which as a minimum
requirement (although not always met) must satisfy thermodynamic consistency. Two conceptually very different formulations are in common use: one is the so-called
‘chemical picture’ where the equation of state is based on
an expression for the free energy of a system consisting
of atoms, ions, etc., containing the relevant physical effects; the second is the ‘physical picture’, which assumes
as building blocks only fundamental particles (nuclei and
electrons), and treats density effects by means of a systematic expansion (for reviews, see for example Däppen,
1998; Däppen and Guzik, 2000). A representative and
commonly used example of the chemical picture is the

(3)

here c̃ is the speed of light, a is the radiation density constant and κ is the opacity, defined such that 1/(κρ) is the
mean free path of a photon. In regions where ∇rad exceeds the adiabatic gradient ∇ad = (∂ ln T /∂ ln p)s , the
derivative being taken at constant specific entropy s, the
layer becomes unstable to convection. In that case energy transport is predominantly by convective motion; as
discussed below, the detailed description of convection is
highly uncertain.
Energy generation in the Sun results from the fusion
of hydrogen into helium. The net reaction can be written
as
4 1 H → 4 He + 2e+ + 2νe ,

(4)

satisfying the constraints of conservation of charge and
lepton number. Here the positrons are immediately annihilated, while the electron neutrinos escape the Sun
essentially without reacting with matter and therefore
represent an immediate energy loss. The actual path by
which this net reaction takes place involves different sequences of reactions, depending on the temperature (for
details, see for example Bahcall, 1989). These reactions
differ substantially in the neutrino energy loss and hence
in the energy actually available to the star.
The change in composition resulting from Eq. (4)
largely drives solar evolution. Until fairly recently, ‘standard’ solar model calculations did not include any other

5

e.g., Wambsganss (1988), Cox et al. (1989), Proffitt and
Michaud (1991), Proffitt (1994), Guenther et al. (1996),
Richard et al. (1996), Gabriel (1997), Morel et al. (1997),
and Turcotte et al. (1998).

4

During most of the evolution of the Sun, the last two terms
in Eq. (2d) are very small compared to the nuclear term.

5

so-called MHD equation of state (Mihalas et al., 1988).
The physical picture has been implemented by the OPAL
group (Rogers et al., 1996). In the opacity calculation
the detailed distribution of the atoms on ionization and
excitation states must be taken into account, obviously
requiring a sufficiently accurate equation of state (see
Däppen and Guzik, 2000). The most commonly used
opacity tables are those of the OPAL group (Iglesias
and Rogers, 1996). Computation of the energy generation and composition changes obviously requires nuclear
cross sections, the determination of which is greatly complicated by the low typical reaction energies relevant to
stellar interiors; recently, two major compilations of nuclear parameters have been published by Adelberger et
al. (1998) and Angulo et al. (1999). Additional complications result from the partial screening of the Coulomb
potential of the reacting nuclei by the stellar plasma; the
so-called weak-screening approximation (Salpeter, 1954)
is still in common use.6 Expressions for the diffusion and
settling coefficients have been provided by, for example,
Michaud and Proffitt (1993) and Thoul et al. (1994).
In the Sun, convection occurs in the outer about 29%
of the solar radius; this is visible on the solar surface
in the form of motion and other fluctuations in the socalled granulation and supergranulation. In the convectively unstable regions, modeling requires a relation to
determine the convective energy transport from the local
structure; particularly important is the superadiabatic
gradient, i.e., the difference between the actual temperature gradient ∇ and the adiabatic value ∇ad , which controls both the dynamics of the convective motion and the
net energy transport. In model calculations this relation
is typically obtained from simple recipies, and characterized by one or more parameters that determine convective efficacy. A characteristic example is the mixinglength treatment (Böhm-Vitense, 1958), parametrized
by the mixing-length parameter αc which measures the
mean free path of convective eddies in units of the local
pressure scale height. Also, it is common to neglect the
dynamical effects of convection, generally described as a
turbulent pressure. In most of the solar convection zone,
convection is so efficient that the actual temperature gradient is very close to the adiabatic value. Near the surface, however, where the density is low, a fairly substantial superadiabatic gradient is required to transport the
energy. The effect of the parametrization of the convection treatment through, e.g., αc is to control the degree
of superadiabaticity and hence, effectively, the adiabat

of the nearly adiabatic part of the convection zone (cf.
Gough & Weiss, 1976).
A more realistic description of the uppermost part of
the convection zone is possible through detailed threedimensional and time-dependent hydrodynamical simulations, taking into account radiative transfer in the atmosphere (e.g., Stein and Nordlund, 1998a). Such simulations successfully reproduce the observed surface structure of solar granulation (e.g., Nordlund and Stein, 1997),
as well as detailed profiles of lines in the solar radiative spectrum, without the use of parametrized models
of turbulence (Asplund et al., 2000a). The simulations
only cover a very small fraction of the solar radius, and
are evidently far too time-consuming to be included in
general solar modeling. Rosenthal et al. (1999) extrapolated an averaged simulation through the adiabatic part
of the convection zone by means of a model based on the
mixing-length description, demonstrating that the adiabat predicted by the simulation was essentially consistent with the depth of the solar convection zone as determined from helioseismology (see Section VII). Also, Li et
al. (2002) developed an extension of mixing-length theory, including effects of turbulent pressure and kinetic
energy, based on numerical simulations of near-surface
convection.

FIG. 1. Hydrogen mass fraction X as a function of fractional
radius in a model of the present Sun (Model S of ChristensenDalsgaard et al., 1996). The insert shows details of the behavior near the base of the convection zone.

The computation of a model of the present Sun typically starts from the so-called zero-age main sequence,
where the model can be assumed to be of uniform composition, with nuclear reactions providing the energy output; however, models have also been computed starting
during the earlier phase of gravitational contraction (e.g.,
Morel et al., 2000). The model is characterized by the
mass (generally assumed to be constant during the evolution) and the initial composition, specified by the abundances X0 , Y0 and Z0 . In addition, parameters characterizing convective energy transport, such as the mixinglength parameter αc , must be specified. The model at
the age of the present Sun must match the present so-

6

A careful analysis of Salpeter’s result was provided by
Brüggen and Gough (1997). For different treatments, see,
for example, Gruzinov and Bahcall (1998) and Shaviv and
Shaviv (2001). Bahcall et al. (2002) gave a critical discussion
of these issues.

6

(Cleveland et al., 1998); this is to be compared to typical
model predictions of around 8 SNU (e.g., Bahcall et al.,
2001; Turck-Chièze et al., 2001a).
This experiment is most sensitive to high-energy neutrinos, and hence the predictions depend on the solar
central temperature to a high power. Thus attempts
to explain the discrepancy, known as the ‘solar neutrino
problem’, generally aimed at lowering the core temperature of the model, for example by postulating a rapidly
rotating core such that the central pressure, and therefore
the central temperature, would be reduced by centrifugal
effects (e.g., Bartenwerfer, 1973; Demarque et al., 1973).
Another suggestion was an inhomogeneous composition,
the interior being lower in heavy elements than the convection zone; this would reduce the opacity and hence
the core temperature (e.g., Joss, 1974). A similar effect
would result if energy transport in the Sun were to take
place in part by non-radiative means, such as through
motion of postulated weakly interacting massive particles
(e.g., Faulkner and Gilliland, 1985; Spergel and Press,
1985; Gilliland et al., 1986). Substantial mixing of the
core was also proposed; by increasing the amount of hydrogen in the core, this would reduce the temperature required to generate the solar luminosity and hence reduce
the neutrino flux (e.g., Ezer and Cameron, 1968; Bahcall,
Bahcall, and Ulrich, 1968; Schatzman et al., 1981). An
interesting variant on this idea, appropriately called ‘the
solar spoon’, was proposed by Dilke and Gough (1972):
according to this the solar core was mixed about a million years ago due to the onset of instability to oscillations, and the present luminosity derives in part from the
readjustment following this mixing, reducing the rate of
nuclear energy generation and hence the neutrino flux.
Detailed calculations have confirmed the required instability (e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard et al., 1974; Boury et
al., 1975); however, it has not been definitely determined
whether or not the subsequent nonlinear development of
the oscillations may lead to mixing.
It should be emphasized that such non-standard models are constructed to satisfy the constraint of the observed solar radius and luminosity; thus, although they
may account for the observed neutrino flux, there is no
independent way of testing them or choosing between
them on the basis of ‘classical’ observations. This is
clearly a rather unsatisfactory situation. As discussed in
Section VII, helioseismology has provided tests of these
non-standard models.
Other experiments have confirmed the discrepancy
between the observed neutrino flux and the predictions of standard solar models. Measurements at the
Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande facilities of neutrino scattering on electrons in water, which detect only
the rare high-energy neutrinos, yield a flux smaller by
about a factor two than the standard models (e.g.,
Fukuda et al., 2001); these measurements are sensi-

lar radius and luminosity, as well as the observed ratio
Zs /Xs of the abundance of heavy elements to hydrogen
at the surface. This is achieved by adjusting αc and Y0 ,
which largely control the radius and luminosity, and the
initial heavy-element abundance Z0 .
To illustrate some properties of models of the present
Sun, Fig. 1 shows the hydrogen-abundance profile X.7
The abundance is uniform in the outer convection zone,
extending from the surface to r = 0.711R, which is fully
mixed; as a result of helium settling, X has increased by
about 0.03 relative to its initial value of 0.709. Just below
the convection zone, helium settling has caused a sharp
gradient in the hydrogen abundance. In the inner parts of
the model the hydrogen abundance has been reduced due
to nuclear fusion. Detailed tables of model quantities,
from a slightly different calculation, were provided by
Bahcall and Pinsonneault (1995).
B. Solar neutrinos

As indicated in Eq. (4), hydrogen fusion in the Sun
unavoidably produces electron neutrinos. It is easy to
estimate, from the solar energy flux, that the total flux of
solar neutrinos at the Earth is around 7 × 1010 cm−2 s−1 .
This depends little on the details of the nuclear reactions in the solar core, as long as the solar energy output
derives solely from nuclear reactions. However, the energy spectrum of the neutrinos depends sensitively on the
branching between the various reactions. This is particularly true of the highest-energy neutrinos, which are produced by a relatively rare and very temperature-sensitive
reaction. This is of crucial importance to attempts to detect neutrinos from the Sun.
A detailed description of the issues related to solar neutrinos, including their detection, was given by
Bahcall (1989). More recent reviews have been provided by, for example, Haxton (1995), Castellani et al.
(1997), Kirsten (1999), and Turck-Chièze (1999). Until recently, three classes of experiments had been carried out to detect solar neutrinos. The first experiment, where the νe reacted with chlorine, was established by R. Davis in the Homestake Gold Mine, South
Dakota, and yielded its initial results in 1968 (Davis et
al., 1968), providing an upper limit on the capture rate
of 3 SNU (Solar Neutrino Units; 1 SNU corresponds
to 10−36 reactions per target atom per second). This
was substantially below the expected flux (e.g., Bahcall,
Bahcall & Shaviv, 1968). The latest average measured
value is 2.56 ± 0.16(statistical) ± 0.16(systematic) SNU

7

Extensive sets of variables for Model S of ChristensenDalsgaard et al. (1996) are available at
http://astro.ifa.au.dk/∼jcd/solar models/.

7

tive to the direction of arrival of the neutrinos and
in this way confirm their solar origin. Detection also
of the lower-energy neutrinos has been made in the
GALLEX and SAGE experiments through neutrino capture in gallium. For GALLEX the resulting measured
detection rate is 77.5 ± 6.2(statistical) ± 4.5(systematic)
SNU (Hampel et al., 1999) while the result for SAGE
is 75.4 ± 6.9(statistical) ± 3.2(systematic) SNU (Gavrin,
2001; see also Abdurashitov et al., 1999); these are again
substantially lower than the model predictions of around
130 SNU.
Although these discrepancies clearly raise doubts
about solar modeling, their origin may instead be in the
properties of the neutrinos. In addition to the electron
neutrino, two other types of neutrinos, the muon neutrino νµ and the tau neutrino ντ , are known. If neutrinos
have finite mass these three types may couple, and hence
the electron neutrinos generated in the solar core may
be converted into neutrinos of the other types, to which
current experiments are less sensitive. A mechanism of
this nature, the so-called MSW effect, was proposed by
Wolfenstein (1978) and Mikheyev and Smirnov (1985).
Here the neutrinos oscillate between the different states
through interaction with matter in the Sun; by choosing appropriately the relevant parameters, it is possible
to bring the measured and computed neutrino capture
rates into agreement. A confirmation that such a mechanism may operate has been obtained through measurements of oscillations of muon neutrinos generated in the
Earth’s atmosphere (e.g., Fukuda et al., 1998). For a recent overview of neutrino oscillations, see Bahcall et al.
(1998).
Very recently new measurements have been announced
from the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, which strongly
support the presence of neutrino oscillations and are consistent with the standard solar model (Ahmad et al.,
2001). Here measurements of high-energy neutrinos are
made through the interaction with deuterium, in the form
of heavy water. This reaction is only sensitive to νe . The
measured flux is significantly lower than the flux obtained
at Super-Kamiokande through electron scattering, which
has some sensitivity to νµ and ντ . Thus the difference
between the two measurements provides an indirect measure of the conversion of νe into νµ and ντ , and hence of
the flux of neutrinos originating from the Sun. The result
agrees, within errors, with standard solar models.
Given this striking confirmation of the existence of neutrino oscillations, the emphasis of solar neutrino research
is shifting towards using the measurements to constrain
the properties of the neutrinos. This evidently requires
secure constraints on the rate of neutrino production in
the Sun. In Section VII.C I return to the possible importance of helioseismology in this regard.

C. The rotation of the Sun

As mentioned in Section III, the solar surface displays
differential rotation, the rotation period varying from
around 25 d at the equator to more than 30 d near the
poles. Different measures of the rotation give somewhat
different results. For example, the rotation rates of magnetic features are generally a few per cent higher than the
photospheric rate as determined from Doppler-velocity
measurements (for a recent review, see Beck, 2000). As
the magnetic field is likely anchored at some depth beneath the solar surface, this suggests the presence of an
increase in rotation rate with depth.
There is as yet no firm theoretical understanding of
the rotation of the Sun and its evolution with time. It
is normally assumed that stars rotate rapidly when they
are formed and subsequently slow down; indeed, one observes a strong correlation between age and rotation rate
amongst solar-type stars (e.g., Skumanich, 1972). The
loss of angular momentum probably takes place through
a stellar wind, magnetically coupled to the outer convection zone (e.g., Mestel, 1968). However, it is not
clear how the convection zone is coupled rotationally to
the radiative interior or how angular momentum may be
transported from the deep interior towards the surface.
Thus while the convection zone is braked, the star might
still retain a rapidly rotating core. In fact, evolution
calculations taking rotation into account, and assuming
angular-momentum transport in the interior as a result
of hydrodynamical instabilities, have found the rotation
of the deep interior of the model of the present Sun to be
several times higher than the surface rotation rate (e.g.,
Pinsonneault et al., 1989; Chaboyer et al., 1995). A sufficiently rapidly rotating core could affect solar structure;
also, the resulting distortion of the Sun’s external gravitational field might compromise tests of Einstein’s theory
of general relativity based on observations of planetary
motion (e.g., Dicke, 1964; Nobili and Will, 1986). Finally, the instabilities invoked to transport angular momentum could also lead to partial mixing of the solar interior, hence affecting its evolution. Thus it is evidently
important to obtain secure information about the solar
internal rotation and the evolution of stellar rotation.
The rotation within the convection zone, and hence
the surface differential rotation, is likely controlled by
angular-momentum transport by the convective motions.
Early hydrodynamical models (e.g., Glatzmaier, 1985;
Gilman and Miller, 1986) indicated that rotation depends
predominantly on the distance to the rotation axis, as
suggested by the Taylor-Proudman theorem (e.g., Pedlosky, 1987; see also Miesch, 2000). Thus the observed
surface variation with latitude would translate into a decrease in rotation rate with depth, at the solar equator,
in apparent conflict with the inferences from different
measures of surface rotation. However, these and other

8

models are certainly far from resolving all the relevant
scales of convection, and hence the results must still be
regarded as somewhat uncertain. I return to these problems in Section XI, in the light of the helioseismic inferences of solar internal rotation.

V. STELLAR OSCILLATIONS

In order to understand the diagnostic potential of solar oscillations, some basic insight into the properties of
stellar oscillations is required.8 The observed oscillations
have extremely small amplitudes and hence can be described as linear perturbations, around the solar models
resulting from evolution calculations. As a result, the
frequencies provide a direct diagnostic of the properties
of the solar interior: given a solar model, the relevant
aspects of the frequencies can be computed very precisely, and the differences between the observed and the
computed frequencies can be related to the errors in the
model.

D. Solar magnetic activity

Because of proximity of the Sun, phenomena on its surface and in its atmosphere can be studied in great, and
often bewildering, detail (for a recent detailed overview,
see Schrijver and Zwaan, 2000). These phenomena are
closely related to magnetic fields and occasionally give
rise to explosions and ejections into the solar wind of
matter and magnetic fields which may harm satellites in
orbit near the Earth and interfere with radio communication and power grids. Thus there is substantial practical
interest in a better understanding of the solar magnetic
activity and, if possible, predictions of eruptions.
At the photospheric level the most visible manifestation of the activity are the sunspots, which have been observed fairly systematically over the last four centuries.
Sunspots are areas of somewhat lower temperature, and
hence lower luminosity, than the rest of the photosphere.
Here convective energy transport is partly suppressed by
a strong magnetic field emerging through the solar surface; typical field strengths are up to 0.4 Tesla. Sunspots
often occur in pairs with opposite polarity, which may
correspond to a loop of magnetic flux anchored in the
solar interior.
The most striking aspect of the sunspots and other
related phenomena is the variation with time: the number of sunspots vary with a period of roughly 11 years.
Observations of the solar magnetic field show that it reverses between sunspot minima; hence the full, magnetic
solar cycle has a period of 22 years. However, there are
considerable variations in the length of the cycle and the
number of spots at solar maximum activity. Interestingly, there were virtually no sunspots during the period
1640 – 1710 (the so-called Maunder minimum), where
the Sun was already observed regularly (e.g., Ribes and
Nemes-Ribes, 1993; Hoyt and Schatten, 1996).
The origin of the solar magnetic activity and its variation with time is likely to involve interactions, often described as dynamo processes, between rotation and motion of the solar plasma within or just beneath the solar
convection zone (e.g., Gilman, 1986; Choudhuri, 1990;
Parker, 1993; Cattaneo, 1997; Charbonneau and MacGregor, 1997). Thus an understanding of the cause of
the solar cyclic variation depends on knowledge about
the solar internal rotation.

A. Equations and boundary conditions
1. Some basic hydrodynamics

A hydrodynamical system is characterized by specifying the physical quantities as functions of position r
and time t. These properties include, e.g., the local density ρ(r, t), the local pressure p(r, t), as well as the local
instantaneous velocity v(r, t). For helioseismology, the
most important aspects of the system concern its mechanical properties. Conservation of mass is expressed
by the equation of continuity:
∂ρ
+ div (ρv) = 0 .
∂t

(6)

In stellar interiors the viscosity in the gas can generally
be neglected, and the relevant forces are in most cases
just pressure and gravity. Then the equations of motion
(also known as Euler’s equations) can be written as


∂v
∇p + ρ g ,
ρ
+ ρv · ∇v = −∇
(7)
∂t
where, on the left-hand side, the quantity in brackets is
the time derivative of velocity in a fluid parcel following the motion. The first term on the right-hand side
is the surface force, given by the pressure p, while the
second term is given by the gravitational acceleration g,
obtained from the gradient of the gravitational poten∇Φ, where Φ satisfies Poisson’s equation,
tial Φ, g = −∇
∇2 Φ = 4πGρ.
To complete the description, we need to relate p and
ρ. In general, this requires consideration of the energetics

8

A much more detailed description of general stellar oscillations was provided by Unno et al. (1989), while Gough (1993)
discussed aspects more directly relevant to helio- and asteroseismology. The classical review by Ledoux and Walraven
(1958) still repays careful study.

9

of the system, as described by the first law of thermodynamics. However, in most of the star the time scale for
energy exchange is much longer than the relevant pulsation periods. Then the motion is essentially adiabatic,
satisfying the adiabatic approximation
Γ1 p dρ
dp
=
,
dt
ρ dt

ρ0

∂ 2δr
∂v
∇p′ + ρ0 g′ + ρ′ g0 ,
= ρ0
= −∇
∂t2
∂t

(13)

∇Φ′ . The perturbation Φ′ to
where, obviously, g′ = −∇
the gravitational potential satisfies the perturbed Poisson
equation

(8)

∇2 Φ′ = 4πGρ′ .

(14)

We finally assume the adiabatic approximation,
Eq. (8), to obtain

where Γ1 = (∂ ln p/∂ ln ρ)s , and d/dt denotes the time
derivative following the motion. We shall use this approximation in most of the analysis of solar oscillations.
It breaks down near the stellar surface, where the local
thermal time scale becomes very short. However, as discussed in Section V.B this is only one amongst a number
of problems in the treatment of this region, which must
be taken into account in the analysis of the observed solar
oscillation frequencies.

∂ δp Γ1,0 p0 ∂ δρ
−
=0,
∂t
ρ0
∂t

(15)

or, by integrating over time and expressing it on Eulerian
form,
p′ + δ r · ∇ p0 =

Γ1,0 p0 ′
(ρ + δ r · ∇ρ0 ) .
ρ0

(16)

2. The linear approximation
3. Equations of linear adiabatic stellar oscillations

We now regard the oscillations as small perturbations
around a stationary equilibrium model, assumed to be
a normal spherically symmetric stellar evolution model.
Thus it satisfies Eqs (2a) and (2b) of stellar structure,
with
g0 = −

Gm0
ar ,
r2

Assuming a spherically symmetric and time-independent equilibrium, the solution is separable in time, and in
the angular coordinates (θ, φ) of the spherical polar coordinates (r, θ, φ) (where θ is co-latitude, i.e., the angle
from the polar axis, and φ is longitude). Then, time dependence is naturally expressed as a harmonic function,
characterized by a frequency ω; for instance, the pressure
perturbation is written on complex form as

(9)

where equilibrium quantities are characterized by subscript ‘0’, and ar is a unit vector in the radial direction.
To describe the oscillations we write, for example, pressure as
p(r, t) = p0 (r) + p′ (r, t) ,

p′ (r, θ, φ, t) = ℜ[p̃′ (r)f (θ, φ) exp(−iωt)] .

Here f (θ, φ), which remains to be specified, describes the
angular variation of the solution and, as indicated, the
amplitude function p̃′ is a function of r alone. For simplicity, I also drop the subscript ‘0’ on equilibrium quantities.
Given a time dependence of this form, Eqs (13) can be
written as

(10)

where p′ is a small perturbation. Here p′ is the Eulerian
perturbation, that is, the perturbation at a given spatial
point. In addition to the velocity v, we introduce the
displacement δ r of fluid elements resulting from the perturbation, such that v = ∂δδ r/∂t. It is also convenient to
consider Lagrangian perturbations, in a reference frame
following the motion. The Lagrangian perturbation to
pressure, for example, may be calculated as
δp(r) = p(r + δ r) − p0 (r) = p′ (r) + δ r · ∇p0 .

ω2δ r =

ρ′
1 ′
∇p − g ′ − g ,
ρ
ρ

(18)

which has the form of a linear eigenvalue problem, ω 2
being the eigenvalue. Indeed, the right-hand side can be
regarded as a linear operator F (δδ r) on δ r: in the adiabatic approximation p′ is related to ρ′ by Eq. (16), and ρ′ ,
in turn, can be obtained from δ r by using Eq. (12); also,
given ρ′ , Φ′ and hence g′ can be obtained by integrating
Eq. (14). I return to this formulation of the problem in
Section V.D, below.
To obtain the proper form of f (θ, φ) in Eq. (17), we
first express the displacement vector as

(11)

To obtain the lowest-order (linear) equations for the
perturbations, we insert expressions such as Eq. (10) into
the full equations, subtract equilibrium equations, and
neglect quantities of order higher than one in p′ , ρ′ , v, etc.
For the continuity equation the result is, after integration
with respect to time,
ρ′ + div (ρ0 δ r) = 0 .

(17)

(12)

δ r = ξr ar + ξ h ,

The equations of motion become
10

where ξ h is the tangential component of the displacement. We now take the tangential divergence divh of
the equations of motion, and use the tangential part of
the continuity equation to eliminate divh ξ h . In the resulting equation, derivatives with respect to θ and φ only
occur in the combination ∇2h , where
∇2h =

r2

kh2 ≃

λh =

2π
2πR
≃ p
;
kh
l(l + 1)

(25)

in other words, l is approximately the number of wavelengths around the stellar circumference. This identification is very useful in the asymptotic analysis of the
oscillations. Also, it follows from, e.g., Eq. (21) that m
measures the number of nodes around the equator.

is the tangential part of the Laplace operator. The same
is obviously true of Poisson’s equation. This shows that
separation in the angular variables can be achieved in
terms of a function f (θ, φ) which is an eigenfunction of
∇2h ,
1
Λf ,
r2

(24)

where kh = |kh |. Thus, for example, the horizontal surface wavelength of the mode is given by

∂
∂
1
∂2
1
sin θ
+ 2 2
sin θ ∂θ
∂θ r sin θ ∂φ2

∇2h f = −

l(l + 1)
,
r2

(19)

where Λ is a constant. A complete set of solutions to this
eigenvalue problem are the spherical harmonics,
f (θ, φ) = (−1)m clm Plm (cos θ) exp(imφ) ≡ Ylm (θ, φ) ,
(20)
where Plm is a Legendre function and clm is a normalization constant, such that the integral of |Ylm |2 over the
unit sphere is unity. Here l and m are integers, such that
−l ≤ m ≤ l and Λ = l(l + 1).
With this separation of variables the pressure perturbation, for example, can be expressed as
√
p′ (r, θ, φ, t) = 4πℜ[p̃′ (r)Ylm (θ, φ) exp(−iωt)] . (21)

FIG. 2. Examples of spherical harmonics, labelled by the degree l and azimuthal order m. For clarity the polar axis has
been inclined 30◦ relative to the plane of the page.

A few examples of spherical harmonics are shown in
Fig. 2. It should be noticed that with increasing degree
the sectoral modes, with m = ±l, become increasingly
confined near the equator.
Given the separation of variables, the equations of adiabatic stellar pulsation are reduced to ordinary differential equations for the amplitude functions; writing the
equations in terms of the variables {ξr , p′ , Φ′ , dΦ′ /dr}
(where I have dropped the tildes) it is straightforward to
obtain

 2


dξr
1
Sl
1 dp
2
ξr + 2
− 1 p′
= −
+
dr
r
Γ1 p dr
ρc
ω2
l(l + 1) ′
+
Φ ,
(26)
ω 2 r2

Also, it follows from the equations of motion that the
displacement vector can be written as
nh
√
(22)
δ r = 4πℜ ξ̃r (r)Ylm (θ, φ)ar
#
)


ξ̃h (r) ∂Ylm
1 ∂Ylm
+
exp(−iωt) ,
aθ +
aφ
L
∂θ
sin θ ∂φ
where
L
ξ˜h (r) =
rω 2



1 ′
p̃ + Φ̃′
ρ



,

(23)

p
and L = l(l + 1); in Eq. (22) aθ and aφ are unit vectors in the θ and φ directions. With this definition ξ˜r
and ξ˜h are essentially the root-mean-square radial and
horizontal displacements.
In investigations of the properties of the oscillations it
is often convenient to approximate locally their spatial
behavior by a plane wave, exp(i k · r), where the local
wavenumber k can be separated into radial and tangential components as k = kr ar + kh . From Eq. (19) it then
follows that

1 dp ′
dΦ′
dp′
= ρ(ω 2 − N 2 )ξr +
p −ρ
,
dr
Γ1 p dr
dr

(27)

and
1 d
r2 dr



 ′

dΦ′
l(l + 1) ′
p
ρξr 2
r2
= 4πG 2 +
+
Φ .
N
dr
c
g
r2
(28)

11

Here
c2 =

Γ1 p
ρ

equations of stellar structure are satisfied, p, g and ρ
are related by Eqs (2a), (2b) and (9). Thus specifying
just ρ(r) and Γ1 (r), say, completely determines the adiabatic oscillation frequencies. Conversely, the observed
frequencies only provide direct information about these
‘mechanical’ quantities. To constrain other properties of
the stellar interior, additional information has to be included, such as the equation of state or Eqs (2c) and
(2d) determining the temperature gradient and luminosity (e.g., Gough and Kosovichev, 1990). It is evident that
the inferences obtained in such investigations may suffer
from uncertainties in, for example, the assumed physics.
The observed solar oscillations are in most cases predominantly of acoustic nature, and hence there frequencies are most sensitive to sound speed. To interpret helioseismic inferences of sound speed in terms of quantities
more directly related to the properties of solar models, it
is instructive to note that equation of state of stellar interiors is reasonably well approximated by that of a perfect,
fully ionized gas, according to which p = kB ρT /(µmu );
here kB is Boltzman’s constant, mu is the atomic mass
unit, and µ is the so-called mean molecular weight, related to the abundances X and Z of hydrogen and heavy
elements by µ ≃ 4/(3 + 5X − Z). In this approximation,
also, Γ1 = 5/3. Thus

(29)

is the squared adiabatic sound speed, and I have introduced the characteristic frequencies Sl and N (the socalled Lamb and buoyancy frequencies), defined by
Sl2 =

l(l + 1)c2
≃ kh2 c2 ,
r2

(30)

and
N2 = g



1 dp 1 dρ
−
Γ1 p dr
ρ dr



.

(31)

The equations must be combined with boundary conditions: two of these ensure regularity at the center, r = 0,
which is a regular singular point of the equations. One
condition enforces continuity of Φ′ and its gradient at
the surface, r = R. Finally, the surface pressure perturbation must satisfy a dynamical condition. In its most
simple form it imposes zero pressure perturbation on the
perturbed surface, i.e.,
δp = 0

at

r=R.

(32)

The fourth-order system of differential equations, Eqs
(26) – (28), and the boundary conditions define an eigenvalue problem which has solutions only for selected discrete values of ω. Thus for each (l, m) we obtain a set of
eigenfrequencies ωnlm , distinguished by their radial order
n.
It should be noticed that in the present case of a spherically symmetric star the frequencies are degenerate in
azimuthal order: the definition of m is tied to the orientation of the coordinate system which, for a spherically
symmetric star, can have no physical significance. Indeed, the equations and boundary conditions do not depend on m. Thus, in analyzing the effects of the spherically symmetric structure of the Sun, the frequencies
are characterized solely by l and n; the relation between
structure and these multiplet frequencies ωnl is discussed
in Sections V.B – V.D. As discussed in Section V.E, the
degeneracy in m is lifted by rotation.

c2 ≃

Γ1 kB T
,
µmu

(33)

i.e., the sound speed is essentially determined by T /µ.
To obtain separate estimates of T and µ, additional constraints on the model are required.
The near-surface layers of the Sun present special problems which have so far not been resolved. Modelling of
the structure of these layers is complicated by the presence of convective motions with Mach numbers approaching 0.5, in the uppermost few hundred km of the convection zone. Results of detailed three-dimensional and
time-dependent hydrodynamical simulations have been
incorporated in a solar model used to compute oscillation
frequencies, resulting in some improvement in the agreement with the observed frequencies (Rosenthal et al.,
1999);9 however, in general simple prescriptions, which
are certainly inadequate, are used for the treatment of
convection in this region. The adiabatic approximation
used in most computations of solar oscillation frequencies is not valid near the surface. Even in the cases
where nonadiabatic calculations have been carried out
(e.g., Guzik and Cox, 1991; Guenther, 1994), these suffer
from neglect, or inadequate treatment, of the perturba-

B. Properties of oscillations

From the point of view of helio- and asteroseismic
investigations, it is important to realize which aspects
of stellar structure are accessible to study, in the sense
of having a direct effect on the oscillation frequencies.
Within the adiabatic approximation it follows from Eqs
(26) – (28) that the frequencies are completely determined by specifying p, ρ, g and Γ1 as functions of the
distance r to the center. However, assuming that the

9

Similar results were obtained by Li et al. (2002) using an
extension of mixing-length theory calibrated against numerical simulations.

12

possible node at the center.
In Figure 3 it appears that the f-mode curve crosses
the g-mode curves; in fact, if l is regarded as a continuous variable,10 it is found that the interaction takes
place through avoided crossings where the frequencies
approach very closely without actually crossing (e.g.
Christensen-Dalsgaard 1980). This type of behavior is
commonly seen for stellar oscillation frequencies, as a
parameter characterizing the solution is varied (e.g. Osaki 1975). It is also well-known in, for example, atomic
physics; an early and very clear discussion of the behavior of eigenvalues in the vicinity of an avoided crossing
was given by von Neuman & Wigner (1929).

tions to the convective flux; furthermore, the perturbation to the turbulent pressure is usually ignored. These
potential problems with the models must be kept in mind
when the observed and computed frequencies are compared. However, it is important to note that they are
in all cases confined to a very thin region near the solar
surface.

C. Asymptotic behavior of stellar oscillations

Although it is relatively straightforward to solve the
equations of adiabatic stellar oscillation, approximate
techniques play a major role in the interpretation of observations of solar and stellar oscillations. They provide
insight into the relation between the observations and the
properties of the stellar interiors, which can inspire more
precise analyses. Also, since the observed solar modes are
in many cases of high order, asymptotic expressions are
sufficiently precise to provide useful quantitative results.
1. Properties of acoustic modes

Most of the modes observed in the Sun are essentially
acoustic modes, often of relatively high radial order. In
this case an asymptotic description can be obtained very
simply, by approximating the modes locally by plane
sound waves, satisfying the dispersion relation

FIG. 3. Cyclic frequencies ν = ω/2π, as functions of degree
l, computed for a normal solar model. Selected values of the
radial order n have been indicated.

ω 2 = c2 |k|2 ,
where k = kr ar +kh is the wave vector. Thus the properties of the modes are entirely controlled by the variation
of the adiabatic sound speed c(r). To describe the radial
variation of the mode, we use Eq. (24) to obtain


Sl2
L2
ω2
ω2
2
(34)
kr = 2 − 2 = 2 1 − 2 .
c
r
c
ω

Figure 3 illustrates adiabatic oscillation frequencies
computed for a solar model. For clarity modes of given
radial order n have been connected. With a few unconfirmed exceptions (see Section VI.B.3) the observed
solar oscillations have frequencies in excess of 500 µHz
(e.g., Schou, 1998a; Bertello et al., 2000; Finsterle and
Fröhlich, 2001; Garcı́a et al., 2001), and hence correspond
to the modes labelled ‘p modes’ and, at relatively high
degree ‘f modes’. As discussed in more detail in the following section, the former are standing acoustic waves,
whereas the latter behave essentially as surface gravity
waves. The modes labelled ‘g modes’ are internal gravity
waves. As indicated, it is conventional to assign positive
and negative radial orders n to p and g modes, respectively, with n = 0 for f modes. With this definition, frequency is an increasing function of n for given l; also, in
most cases |n| corresponds to the number of radial nodes
in the radial component of the displacement, excluding a

This equation can be interpreted very simply in geometrical terms through the behavior of rays of sound, as
illustrated in Fig. 4. With increasing depth beneath the
surface of a star temperature, and hence sound speed,
increases. As a result, waves that are not propagating
vertically are refracted, as indicated in Eq. (34) by the

10
This is clearly mathematically permissible, although only
the integral values of l have a physical meaning.

13

decrease in kr with increasing c; the horizontal component |kh | of the wave vector, in contrast, increases with
decreasing r. Thus the rays bend, as shown in Fig. 4.
The waves travel horizontally at the lower turning point,
r = rt , where ω = Sl and hence kr = 0, i.e.,
ω
c(rt )
= .
rt
L

where

ω 
π(n + α)
,
≃F
ω
L

F (w) =

Z

R

rt

(35)

1/2

dr
c2
.
1− 2 2
w r
c

(37)

(38)

That the observed frequencies of solar oscillation satisfy
the simple functional relation given by Eq. (37) was first
found by Duvall (1982); this relation is therefore commonly known as the Duvall law.

For r < rt , kr is imaginary and the wave decays exponentially.

2. A proper asymptotic treatment

Although instructive, this derivation is hardly satisfactory, in either a mathematical or physical sense. It
ignores the fact that the oscillations are not purely acoustic of nature, and neglects effects of variations of stellar
structure with position. Also, effects near the stellar surface leading to reflection of the waves are simply postulated.
A more satisfactory description can be based on
asymptotic analyses of the oscillation equations, Eqs (26)
– (28). The modes observed in the Sun are either of high
radial order or high degree. In such cases it is often
possible, in approximate analyses, to make the so-called
Cowling approximation, where the perturbation Φ′ to
the gravitational potential is neglected (Cowling, 1941).
This can be justified, at least partly,11 by noting that
for modes of high order or high degree, and hence varying rapidly as a function of position, the contributions
from regions where ρ′ have opposite sign largely cancel
in Φ′ . In this approximation, the order of the equations
is reduced to two, making them amenable to standard
asymptotic techniques (e.g., Ledoux, 1962; Vandakurov,
1967; Smeyers, 1968). A convenient formulation has been
derived by Gough (see Deubner and Gough, 1984; Gough,
1993): in terms of the quantity

FIG. 4. Propagation of rays of sound in a cross-section of
the solar interior. The ray paths are bent by the increase in
sound speed with depth until they reach the inner turning
point (indicated by the dotted circles) where they undergo
total internal refraction. At the surface the waves are reflected
by the rapid decrease in density.

The normal modes observed as global oscillations on
the stellar surface arise through interference between
waves propagating in this manner. In particular, they
share with the waves the total internal reflection at
r = rt . It follows from Eq. (35) that the lower turning
point is located the closer to the center, the lower is the
degree or the higher is the frequency. Radial modes, with
l = 0, penetrate the center, whereas the modes of highest
> 1000, are trapped in
degree observed in the Sun, with l ∼
the outer small fraction of a per cent of the solar radius.
Thus the oscillation frequencies of different modes reflect
very different parts of the Sun; it is largely this variation
in sensitivity which allows the detailed inversion for the
properties of the solar interior as a function of position
(see also Sections VII and VIII).
Equation (34) can be used to justify an approximate,
but extremely useful, expression for the frequencies of
acoustic oscillation. The requirement of a standing wave
in the radial direction implies that the integral of kr over
the region of propagation, between r = rt and R, must
be an integral multiple of π, apart from possible effects
of phase changes at the end-points of the interval:
(n + α)π ≃

Z

R

rt

kr dr ≃

Z

R
rt

ω
c


1/2
Sl2
1− 2
dr ,
ω

Ψ = c2 ρ1/2 div δ r ,

(39)

the oscillation equations can be approximated by
d2 Ψ
= −K(r)Ψ ,
dr2

(40)




ωc2
N2
Sl2
ω2
.
K(r) = 2 1 − 2 − 2 1 − 2
c
ω
ω
ω

(41)

where

(36)
11

The validity of this argument under all circumstances is
not entirely obvious, however; see Christensen-Dalsgaard and
Gough (2001).

where α contains the phase changes at the points of reflection. This may also be written as
14

Here N 2 and Sl2 were defined in Eqs (30) and (31), and
the acoustical cut-off frequency ωc is given by


dH
c2
2
,
(42)
1−2
ωc =
4H 2
dr

thus, roughly speaking, modes have an oscillatory behavior where ω > Sl and ω > ωc . Another type of propagation occurs at low frequency, in a region where ω < N .
Examples of propagation regions corresponding to these
two cases are marked in Fig. 5. Modes corresponding to
the former case are called p modes; it follows from the
analysis given above that they are essentially standing
sound waves, where the dominant restoring force is pressure. Modes corresponding to the latter cases are called
g modes; here the dominant restoring force is buoyancy,
and the modes have the character of standing internal
gravity waves.
Equations (40) and (41) are in a form well suited for
JWKB analysis.12 The result is that the modes satisfy

1/2
Z r2 
ωc2
N2
Sl2
dr
1− 2 − 2 1− 2
ω
≃ π(n − 1/2) ,
ω
ω
ω
c
r1

where H = −(d ln ρ/dr)−1 is the density scale height.
In addition to the modes determined by Eq. (40), there
are modes for which div δ r ≃ 0; these modes clearly cannot be analyzed in terms of Ψ. They approximately correspond to surface gravity waves, with frequencies satisfying
ω 2 ≃ gkh ,

(43)

and are usually known as f modes. I return to them in
Section V.C.4.

(44)
where r1 and r2 are adjacent zeros of K such that K > 0
between them.
3. Asymptotic properties of p modes

For the p modes, we may approximately neglect the
term in N and, except near the surface, the term in
ωc . Thus we recover Eq. (34); in particular, the location of the lower turning point is approximately given by
Eq. (35). Near the surface, on the other hand, Sl ≪ ω for
small or moderate l and may be neglected (cf. Fig. 5);
thus the location r = Rt of the upper turning point is
determined by ω ≃ ωc . Physically, this corresponds to
the reflection of the waves where the wavelength becomes
comparable to the local density scale height. It should
also be noticed from Fig. 5 that ωc approximately tends
to a constant in the stellar atmosphere. Modes with frequencies exceeding the atmospheric value of ωc are only
partially trapped, losing energy in the form of running
waves in the solar atmosphere; hence they may be expected to be rather strongly damped.
If we assume that |N 2 /ω 2 | ≪ 1, Eq. (44) simplifies to
1/2
Z r2 
ω2
S2
dr
1 − c2 − l2
ω
≃ π(n − 1/2) ,
(45)
ω
ω
c
r1

FIG. 5. Characteristic frequencies N/2π (solid line), ωc /2π
(dotted line) and Sl /2π (dashed lines, labelled by l) for l = 1,
10, 50, 100 and 500. The frequencies have been computed for
Model S of Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1996). The heavy
horizontal lines mark the trapping regions of a g mode of
frequency 100 µHz and a p mode of frequency 3000 µHz and
degree l = 10.

The physical meaning of Eq. (40) becomes clear if we
make the identification K = kr2 where, as before, kr is
the radial component of the local wave number. Accordingly, a mode oscillates as a function of r in regions where
K > 0; such regions are referred to as regions of propagation. The mode is evanescent, decreasing or increasing
exponentially, where K < 0. The detailed behavior of
the mode is thus controlled by the value of the frequency,
relative to the characteristic frequencies Sl , N and ωc .
Figure 5 illustrates the characteristic frequencies in a
model of the present Sun. It is evident that ωc is large
only near the stellar surface, where the density scale
height is small. In the range of observed solar oscillations
the frequencies are higher than the buoyancy frequency;

where, as discussed above, r1 ≃ rt and r2 ≃ Rt . Further
simplification results by noting that since ωc /ω ≪ 1, except near the upper turning point, the integral may be
expanded, yielding

12

For Jeffreys, Wentzel, Kramers and Brillouin, who were
amongst the first to use such techniques. Applications to
quantum mechanics, were discussed, for example, by Schiff
(1949).

15

ω

Z

R

rt

1/2

dr
Sl2
≃ π[n + α(ω)]
1− 2
ω
c

of the structure of stellar cores. In particular, we note
that, according to Eq. (33), the core sound speed is reduced as µ increases with the conversion of hydrogen to
helium as the star ages. As a result, dnl is reduced, thus
providing a measure of the evolutionary state of the star
(e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1984, 1988; Ulrich, 1986;
Gough and Novotny, 1990; see also Gough, 2001a).
It is interesting to investigate the effects on the frequencies of small changes to the model. Such frequency
changes may be estimated quite simply by linearizing the
Duvall law in differences δωnl in ωnl , δr c(r) in c(r) and
δα(ω) in α(ω). The result can be written (ChristensenDalsgaard et al., 1988)

(46)

(e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard and Pérez Hernández,
1992). Here we again assumed that Sl ≪ ω near the
upper turning point; consequently α depends only on
frequency and results from the expansion of the nearsurface behavior of ωc . Thus we recover Eqs (37) and
(38), previously obtained from a simple analysis of sound
waves. From a physical point of view, the assumption on
Sl ensures that the waves travel nearly vertically near
the surface; thus their behavior is independent of their
horizontal structure, leading to a phase shift depending
solely on frequency.
For low-degree modes these relations may be simplified
even further, by noting that in the integrand in Eq. (38)
(. . .)1/2 differs from unity only close to the lower turning
point which, for these modes, is situated very close to the
center. As a result it is possible to expand the integral to
RR
obtain, to lowest order, that F (w) ≃ 0 dr/c − w−1 π/2.
Furthermore, a more careful analysis shows that for lowdegree modes L should be replaced by13 l + 1/2 (e.g.,
Vandakurov, 1967; Tassoul, 1980). Thus from Eq. (37)
we obtain


l
1
ωnl
≃ n + + + α ∆ν ,
(47)
νnl ≡
2π
2 4
RR
where ∆ν = [2 0 dr/c]−1 is the inverse of twice the
sound travel time between the center and the surface.
This equation predicts a uniform spacing ∆ν in n of
the frequencies of low-degree modes. Also, modes with
the same value of n + l/2 should be almost degenerate,
νnl ≃ νn−1 l+2 . This frequency pattern was first observed
for the solar five-minute modes of low degree by Claverie
et al. (1979) and may be used in the search for stellar
oscillations of solar type.
The deviations from the simple relation (47) have considerable diagnostic potential. By extending the expansion of Eq. (38), leading to Eq. (47), to take into account
the variation of c in the core one finds (Gough, 1986; see
also Tassoul, 1980)
Z R
∆ν
dc dr
;
dnl ≡ νnl − νn−1 l+2 ≃ −(4l + 6) 2
4π νnl 0 dr r

Snl

ω 
δωnl
nl
+ H2 (ωnl ) ,
≃ H1
ωnl
L

(49)

where
Snl =

Z

R

rt

H1 (w) =


Z

R

rt

L 2 c2
2
r2 ωnl

−1/2

dr
dα
−π
,
c
dω

(50)

−1/2

c2
δr c dr
1− 2 2
,
r w
c c

(51)

1−

and
H2 (ω) =

π
δα(ω) .
ω

(52)

Christensen-Dalsgaard, Gough, and Thompson (1989)
noted that H1 (ω/L) and H2 (ω) can be obtained separately, to within a constant, by means of a double-spline
fit of the expression (49) to p-mode frequency differences. The dependence of H1 on ω/L is determined by
the sound-speed difference throughout the star; in fact,
it is straightforward to verify that the contribution from
H1 is essentially just an average of δr c/c, weighted by the
sound-travel time along the rays characterizing the mode.
The contribution from H2 (ω) depends on differences in
the upper layers of the models. Thus, in particular, it
contains the effects of the near-surface errors discussed
in Section V.B.
The preceding, relatively simple, asymptotic analysis
has been improved in several investigations. For modes
of high degree the expansion leading to a frequencydependent phase function α(ω) in Eq. (46) is no longer
valid; Brodsky and Vorontsov (1993) showed how the
analysis could be generalized to obtain the l-dependence
of α. For modes of low degree or relatively low frequency the perturbation to the gravitational potential
can no longer be ignored, and it may furthermore be
necessary to include the effect of the buoyancy frequency
in the asymptotic dispersion relation (e.g., Vorontsov,
1989, 1991; Gough, 1993). Finally, the usual asymptotic
expansion, as used for example to obtain Eq. (48), is

(48)
here the integral is predominantly weighted towards the
center of the star, as a result of the factor r−1 in the integrand. This behavior provides an important diagnostic

13

Note that, in any case, except at the lowest degrees this is
an excellent approximation to the original definition of L; thus
in the asymptotic discussions I shall use the two definitions
interchangeably.

16

somewhat questionable in the core of the star where conditions vary on a scale comparable with the wavelengths
of the modes; here other formulations may be more appropriate (e.g., Roxburgh and Vorontsov, 1994a, 2000ab,
2001). However, for the present review the simpler expressions are generally adequate.

where the right-hand side is the linearized force per unit
mass, which, as discussed in Section V.A.2, can be regarded as a linear operator on δ r.
The central result is that Eq. (54), applied to adiabatic
oscillations, defines a variational principle. Specifically,
by multiplying the equation by ρδδ r∗ (‘∗’ denoting the
complex conjugate) and integrating over the volume V
of the star, we obtain
R
δ r∗ · F(δδ r)ρdV
2
.
(55)
ω = V R
|δδ r|2 ρdV
V

4. f and g modes

In addition to p modes, the observations of solar oscillations also show f modes of moderate and high degree. As discussed above, these modes are approximately
divergence-free, with frequencies given by (cf. Eq. 43)
ω 2 ≃ gs kh =

GM
L,
R3

We now consider adiabatic oscillations which satisfy the
surface boundary condition given by Eq. (32). In this
case it may be shown that the right-hand side of Eq. (55)
is stationary with respect to small perturbations to the
eigenfunction δ r (e.g., Chandrasekhar, 1964).
A very important application of this principle concerns
the effect on the frequencies of perturbations to the equilibrium model or other aspects of the physics of the oscillations. Such perturbations can in general be expressed
as a perturbation δF to the force in Eq. (54). It follows
from the variational principle that their effect on the frequencies can be determined as
R
δ r∗ · δF (δδ r)ρdV
2
,
(56)
δω = V R
δ 2
V |δ r| ρdV

(53)

where gs is the surface gravity. It may be shown that the
displacement eigenfunction is approximately exponential,
ξr ∝ exp(kh r), as is the case for surface gravity waves in
deep water. According to Eq. (53) the frequencies of
these modes are independent of the internal structure of
the star; this allows the modes to be uniquely identified in the observed spectra, regardless of possible model
uncertainties. A more careful analysis must take into account the fact that gravity varies through the region over
which the mode has substantial amplitude; this results
in a weak dependence of the frequencies on the density
structure (Gough, 1993).
I finally briefly consider the properties of g modes. It
follows from Fig. 5 that these are trapped in the radiative interior and behave exponentially in the convection
zone. In fact, they have their largest amplitude close
to the solar center and hence are potentially very interesting as probes of conditions in the deep solar interior.
High-degree g modes are very effectively trapped by the
exponential decay in the convection zone and are therefore unlikely to be visible at the surface. However, for
low-degree modes the trapping is relatively inefficient,
and hence the modes might be expected to be observable, if they were excited to reasonable amplitudes. The
behavior of the oscillation frequencies can be obtained
from Eq. (44). In the limit where ω ≪ N in much of
the radiative interior this shows that the modes are uniformly spaced in oscillation period, with a period spacing
that depends on degree.

evaluated using the eigenfunction δ r of the unperturbed
force operator. Applications of this expression to rather
general situations were considered by Lynden-Bell and
Ostriker (1967).
Equation (56) provides the basis for determining the
relation between differences in structure and differences
in frequencies between the Sun and solar models. As
discussed in Section V.B, the oscillation frequencies are
determined by a suitable pair of model variables, e.g.,
the pair (c2 , ρ), which reflects the acoustic nature of the
observed modes. The differences between the structure
of the Sun and a model can then be characterized by
the differences δr c2 /c2 = [c2⊙ (r) − c2mod (r)]/c2 (r) and
δr ρ/ρ = [ρ⊙ (r) − ρmod (r)]/ρ(r). In particular, the perturbation δF can be expressed in terms of δr c2 /c2 and
δr ρ/ρ, through appropriate use of the linearized versions
of Eqs (2a) and (2b) (e.g., Gough and Thompson, 1991),
resulting in a linear relation for the frequency change in
terms of the structure differences.
The analysis in terms of δr c2 /c2 and δr ρ/ρ only captures the differences between the Sun and the model to
the extent that they relate to the hydrostatic structure
of the Sun. As discussed in Section V.B, inadequacies in
the treatment of the physics of the modes, such as nonadiabatic effects, contribute in the near-surface layers of
the Sun. These can also be represented as perturbations
δFsurf , such that δFsurf (δδ r) is significant only in the superficial layers. For modes of low or moderate degree the

D. Variational principle

The formulation of the oscillation equations given in
Eq. (18) is the starting point for powerful analyses of
general properties of stellar pulsations. For convenience,
we write the equation as
ω 2 δ r = F (δδ r) ,

(54)
17

eigenfunctions depend little on degree in this region, as
discussed in Section V.C.3. Assuming that δFsurf does
explicitly on l, it follows that for these modes
Rnot depend
∗
δ
r
·
δF
(δδ r)ρdV depends little on l; hence, accordsurf
V
ing to Eq. (56), the effects of the near-surface problems
may in general be expected to be of the form


δωnl
−1
≃ Inl
Fsurf (ωnl ) ,
(57)
ωnl surf
R
where Inl = V |δδ r|2 ρdV , the denominator in Eq. (56),
is known as the mode inertia and, as indicated, Fsurf depends only on frequency. We note also that at relatively
low frequency the relevant superficial layers are outside
the upper turning point determined by ω = ωc (cf.
Fig. 5) and hence the modes are evanescent in this region.
Thus we expect the effects of the near-surface problems
to be small for low-frequency modes (e.g., ChristensenDalsgaard and Thompson, 1997).
The mode inertia still depends on both degree and frequency: in particular, modes of high degree and/or low
frequency are trapped closer to the the solar surface (cf.
Eq. 35), involve a smaller fraction of the Sun’s mass and
hence have a smaller Inl . Thus high-degree modes are affected more strongly by the near-surface errors than are
low-degree modes at the same frequency. To eliminate
this essentially trivial effect, it is instructive to consider
frequency differences scaled by Inl . This may be done
conveniently by scaling the frequencies by
Inl
Qnl ≡ ¯
,
I0 (ωnl )

the frequency differences are separated into contributions
from the bulk of the Sun (in the asymptotic case characterized solely by the sound-speed difference) and from
the near-surface layers, the latter depending essentially
only on frequency after appropriate scaling; indeed, it
may be shown that Snl and Inl are closely related.
E. Effects of rotation

So far, we have considered only oscillations of a spherically symmetric star; in this case, the frequencies are
independent of the azimuthal order m. Departures from
spherical symmetry lift this degeneracy, causing a frequency splitting according to m.
The most obvious, and most important, such departure
is rotation; early studies of the effect of rotation were presented by Cowling and Newing (1949) and Ledoux (1949,
1951). A simple description can be obtained by first noting that, according to Eqs (20) and (22), the oscillations
depend on longitude φ and time t as cos(mφ−ωt), i.e., as
a wave running around the equator. We now consider a
star rotating with angular velocity Ω and a mode of oscillation with frequency ω0 in a frame rotating with the star;
the coordinate system is chosen with polar axis along
the axis of rotation. Letting φ′ denote longitude in this
frame, the oscillation therefore behaves as cos(mφ′ −ω0 t).
The longitude φ in an inertial frame is related to φ′ by
φ′ = φ − Ωt; consequently, the oscillation as observed
from the inertial frame depends on φ and t as

(58)

cos(mφ − mΩt − ω0 t) ≡ cos(mφ − ωm t) ,

where I¯0 (ωnl ) is the inertia of a hypothetical radial mode
(with l = 0) with frequency ωnl , obtained by interpolation to that frequency in the inertias for the actual radial
modes. This effectively reduces the frequency shift to the
effect on a radial mode of the same frequency. Examples
of scaled frequency differences will be shown later.
From the preceding analysis it finally follows that the
frequency differences between the Sun and the model,
assuming that the differences are so small that a linear
representation is adequate, can be written as

Z R
δ r c2
δr ρ
δωnl
nl
nl
Kc2 ,ρ (r) 2 (r) + Kρ,c2 (r)
=
(r) dr
ωnl
c
ρ
0
−1
+Inl
Fsurf (ωnl ) ,

where ωm = ω0 + mΩ. Thus the frequencies are split
according to m, the separation between adjacent values
of m being simply the angular velocity; this is obviously
just the result of the advection of the wave pattern with
rotation.
This simple description contains the dominant physical effect, i.e., advection, of rotation on the observed
modes of oscillation, but it suffers from two problems: it
assumes solid-body rotation, whereas the Sun rotates differentially; and it neglects the effects, such as the Coriolis
force, in the rotating frame. In a complete description in
an inertial frame, including terms linear in the angular
velocity,14 Eq. (18) must be replaced by

(59)

ω 2δ r =

nl
where the kernels Kcnl2 ,ρ and Kρ,c
2 , which result from
manipulating δF , are computed from the eigenfunctions
of the reference model (e.g., Dziembowski et al., 1990;
Däppen et al., 1991; Gough & Thompson, 1991). This
relation forms the basis for inversions of the oscillation
frequencies to determine solar structure (see Section VII).
The similarity of Eq. (59) to the asymptotic expressions in Eqs (50) – (52) should be noted. In both cases

14

ρ′
1 ′
∇p − g′ − g + 2mωΩδδr − 2iωΩ
Ω × δ r , (60)
ρ
ρ

In the solar case the centrifugal force and other effects
of second or higher order in Ω, including the distortion
of the equilibrium structure, can be neglected to a good
approximation.

18

where Ω is the rotation vector, of magnitude Ω and
aligned with the rotation axis. The first term resulting
from rotation is the contribution from advection, as discussed above, whereas the last term is the Coriolis force.
The terms arising from rotation obviously correspond
to a perturbation to the force operator F in Eq. (54);
from Eq. (56) the effect on the oscillation frequencies can
be obtained on the form
Z RZ π
ωnlm = ωnl0 + m
Knlm (r, θ)Ω(r, θ)rdrdθ , (61)
0

even functions of m, also changing the mean frequency of
the multiplet (e.g., Gough and Thompson, 1990), while
cubic terms may be important in cases of modes closely
spaced in frequency, such as result from the asymptotic
behavior of low-degree p modes (cf. Section V.C.3). A
detailed discussion of these effects was given by Soufi,
Goupil & Dziembowski (1998); they can give rise to complex oscillation spectra, considerably complicating mode
identification for rapidly rotating stars.

0

F. The causes of solar oscillations

where the kernels Knlm can be calculated from the eigenfunctions for the non-rotating model. The kernels depend
only on m2 , so that the rotational splitting ωnlm − ωnl0 is
an odd function of m. Also, the kernels are symmetrical
around the equator; as a result, the rotational splitting
is only sensitive to the component of Ω which is similarly
symmetrical.

Given the assumption of adiabatic oscillations, no information is obtained about the possible damping or driving of the modes: the equations are conservative and do
not involve any energy exchange between the oscillations
and the flow of energy in the equilibrium model. Calculations taking into account nonadiabatic effects have investigated the linear stability of stellar oscillations; this
is determined by the imaginary part ωi of the complex
frequency ω, modes with positive ωi being unstable. It
is found that many types of stars, for example the classical Cepheids, have unstable modes; the instability results
from favourable phase relations between the compression
and the perturbation to the heat flux in the oscillations,
often caused by suitable variations in the opacity.
Early nonadiabatic calculations of solar oscillations
(e.g., Ando and Osaki, 1975) found that modes in the observed range of frequencies were in fact unstable. These
calculations, however, used a simplified treatment of radiative transfer in the outer layers of the Sun and, more
importantly, neglected effects of convection. Balmforth
(1992a) carried out nonadiabatic calculations of solar
oscillations, including convective effects; these were described by expressions, based on mixing-length theory,
for the perturbations induced by stellar pulsation to the
convective flux and turbulent stresses, developed from an
original formulation of Gough (1977a). He found that all
the modes were damped, an important contribution to
the damping coming from the perturbation to the turbulent pressure.15
This motivates a search for driving mechanisms external to the oscillations, the most natural source being the
vigorous convection near the solar surface, where motion at near-sonic speed may be expected to be a strong
source of acoustic waves (Lighthill, 1952). Stein (1967)
applied this to the interpretation of the solar five-minute
oscillations. An early estimate of the expected amplitude

FIG. 6. Contour plots of rotational kernels Knlm in a solar
quadrant. The modes all have frequencies near 2 mHz; the
following pairs of (l, m) are included: a) (5, 2); b) (20, 8); c)
(20, 17); and d) (20, 20).

The general expression for the rotational kernels is
quite complicated and will not be given here (see, for example, Hansen et al., 1977; Cuypers, 1980; Gough, 1981).
Examples of kernels are shown in Fig. 6. The extent in
the radial direction is essentially determined by the location of the lower turning point, r = rt (cf. Eq. 35). The
latitudinal extent is determined by the properties of the
Legendre functions Plm ; it follows from their asymptotic
behavior that the kernels are confined between latitudes
± cos−1 (|m|/L). Thus, as also reflected in the behavior
of the spherical harmonics (Fig. 2) modes with low |m|
extend over essentially all latitudes, whereas modes with
m ≃ ±l are confined close to the equator.
If Ω = Ω(r) is assumed to be a function of r alone,
the corresponding kernels do not depend on m, so that
Eq. (61) predicts a uniform frequency splitting in m. This
is often written on the form
Z R
δωnlm ≡ ωnlm − ωnl0 = mβnl
Knl (r)Ω(r)dr , (62)
0

R

where Knl is unimodular, i.e., Knl (r)dr = 1.
For stars rotating substantially more rapidly than the
Sun terms of higher order in Ω must be taken into account. Terms quadratic in Ω, such as the centrifugal
distortion, give rise to frequency perturbations that are

15

It should be noted, however, that Xiong et al. (2000) found
some solar modes to be unstable, using a different formulation
for the convective effects.

19

of global modes excited by this mechanism was made by
Goldreich and Keeley (1977).
Since each mode feels the effect of a very large number of turbulent eddies, acting at random, the combined
effect is that of a stochastic forcing of the mode. To illustrate the properties of the resulting oscillations I consider
a very simple model of this process (Batchelor, 1956;
see also Christensen-Dalsgaard, Gough, and Libbrecht,
1989), consisting of a simple damped oscillator of amplitude A(t), forced by a random function f (t), and hence
satisfying the equation
dA
d2 A
+ 2η
+ ω02 A = f (t) ;
2
dt
dt

the solar surface is much smaller than the horizontal
wavelength of the oscillations, the interaction is likely
to depend little on the degree l of the modes; thus, as
is indeed observed, we expect excitation of modes at all
degrees within the relevant frequency range, with amplitudes that depend relatively little on degree except
at high degree (e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard and Gough,
1982; Woodard et al., 2001).
The observed line profiles show significant departures
from the Lorentzian shape, in the form of asymmetries.
These can be understood from more complete models of
the excitation, taking into account that the dominant
contributions to the forcing are spatially localized to relatively thin regions beneath the solar surface (e.g., Duvall et al., 1993a; Gabriel, 1993, 2000; Roxburgh and
Vorontsov, 1995; Abrams and Kumar, 1996; Nigam and
Kosovichev, 1998; Rast and Bogdan, 1998; Rosenthal,
1998). The observed asymmetry can be used to constrain
the depth and other properties of the excitation (Chaplin and Appourchaux, 1999; Kumar and Basu, 1999;
Nigam and Kosovichev, 1999) and hence obtain information about subsurface convection.

(63)

here η is the linear damping rate, η = −ωi . This equation
is most easily dealt with in terms of its Fourier transform. Introducing
the Fourier transforms
Ã(ω) and f˜(ω)
R
R
iωt
iωt
˜
by Ã(ω) = A(t)e dt, f (ω) = f (t)e dt, we obtain
from Eq. (63)
−ω 2 Ã − 2iηω Ã + ω02 Ã = f˜ .

(64)

This yields the power spectrum of the oscillator as
P (ω) = |Ã(ω)|2 =

(ω02

|f˜(ω)|2
.
− ω 2 )2 + 4η 2 ω 2

VI. OBSERVATION OF SOLAR OSCILLATION

(65)

Solar oscillations manifest themselves in the solar atmosphere in different ways: the displacement causes the
atmosphere to move, changes in the energy transport in
the outer layers of the Sun cause oscillations in the solar
energy output, while oscillations in the atmospheric temperature are reflected in the properties of the solar spectral lines. Each of these effects may be used to observe
the oscillations; since they all reflect the same underlying
modes they should evidently yield the same oscillation
frequencies. The choice of observing technique is then
determined by a combination of technical considerations
and noise properties, including the effects of the Earth’s
atmosphere for ground-based observations, and effects of
other variations in the solar atmosphere. A detailed review of techniques for helioseismic observations and data
analysis was given by Brown (1996).
The combined oscillation velocity amplitude in the
five-minute range at any given point on the solar surface, as detected by Leighton et al. (1962), is around
500 m s−1. However, this results from the random combination of signals from of order 107 individual modes.
The velocity amplitude for each mode is at most around
10 cm s−1 . The corresponding amplitude in relative intensity perturbations is a few parts per million. Thus
extreme sensitivity is required to carry out detailed observations of the oscillations. Furthermore, the observations have to deal with other fluctuations in the solar
atmosphere, such as resulting from near-surface convection and solar activity, of far higher magnitude. That

Near the peak in the spectrum, where |ω − ω0 | ≪ ω0 the
average power of the oscillation is therefore given by
hP (ω)i ≃

Pf (ω)
1
,
2
4ω0 (ω − ω0 )2 + η 2

(66)

where Pf (ω) = h|f˜(ω)|2 i is the average power of the forcing function.
Since Pf (ω) is often a slowly varying function of frequency, the frequency dependence of hP (ω)i is dominated
by the denominator in Eq. (66). The resulting profile is
therefore approximately Lorentzian, with a width determined by the linear damping rate η. Consequently, under
the assumption of stochastic excitation one can make a
meaningful comparison between computed damping rates
and observed line widths.
It should be noted that this model makes definite predictions about the oscillation amplitudes, from the power
available in the forcing function. This depends on the details of the interaction between convection and the oscillations, with contributions both from Reynolds stresses
and entropy fluctuations generated by convection (e.g.,
Goldreich and Kumar, 1990; Balmforth, 1992b; Goldreich et al., 1994; Samadi et al., 2001; Stein and Nordlund,
2001). The excitation varies strongly with frequency as
a result both of the structure of the eigenfunction and
the temporal spectrum of convection, hence accounting
for the frequency dependence of the mode amplitudes.
However, since the horizontal scale of convection near
20

it is even possible to extract the small oscillation signal
is in large measure due to the high spatial and temporal coherence of the oscillations, with lifetimes extending
over several weeks to months; in contrast, other phenomena in the solar atmosphere typically have low coherence in space and time. Thus, by integrating over the
solar disk and analyzing data over extended periods in
time, the solar ‘noise’ is suppressed and the oscillations
can be isolated; even so, in current observations of solar
oscillations the effects of random solar fluctuations are
probably the dominant source of background noise. To
achieve the noise suppression and the required frequency
resolution the observations are typically analyzed coherently over several months; furthermore, temporal gaps
in the data introduce frequency sidebands in the power
spectrum which complicate the determination of the frequencies, and hence data with minimal interruptions are
highly desirable. This immediately points to the need
for the combination of data from several sites around the
Earth, to compensate for the day/night cycle, or for observations from space.

line shift is obtained from four measurements in narrow
bands across a given spectral line. This allows the definition of a measure that is essentially linear in the lineof-sight velocity, over the considerable range of velocities
encountered over the solar surface. In the actual implementations the spectral bands are defined by Michelson
interferometers. Examples of Doppler images obtained
using this technique are shown in Fig. 8.

A. Observing techniques
FIG. 7. Schematic illustration of Doppler-velocity observations. In a), the line-of-sight velocity shifts the line in wavelength by ∆λ, from the continuous to the dashed position.
This changes the intensities Ib and Ir measured in the narrow
wavelength intervals shown as hatched, as well as the ratio
(Ib − Ir )/(Ib + Ir ) which provides a measure of the shift and
hence of the velocity. Panel b) illustrates the experimental
setup. The filter alternates between letting light in the Ib
and Ir bands through. If an imaging detector is used, the
resulting images in Ib and Ir can be combined into a Doppler
image.

The most detailed observations of solar oscillations
have been carried out in line-of-sight velocity, measured
from the Doppler shift of lines in the solar spectrum.
As illustrated in Fig. 7, this may be done by measuring
the intensity in two bands on either side of a suitable
spectral line. If the intensities are recorded by means
of an imaging detector, the result is a velocity image,
measuring simultaneously the motion of the solar surface
with potentially high spatial resolution. Alternatively,
by passing integrated light from the Sun through the filter to the detector, one obtains a disk-averaged velocity,
corresponding to observing the Sun as a star.
The main challenge in the observations is to provide
a stable determination of the wavelength intervals defining the two intensities. In an ingenious technique for
disk-averaged observations, the filter is replaced by a
scattering cell, where light is scattered from the Zeemansplit components of a line in sodium or potassium vapour
placed in the field from a permanent magnet (e.g., Fossat and Ricort, 1975; Brookes et al., 1976). Here the
wavelength bands are determined mainly by the strength
of the field, which is very stable, with little sensitivity
to other properties of the instrument. A variant of this
technique (e.g., Cacciani and Fofi, 1978) can be used as a
magneto-optical transmission filter for spatially resolved
observations (e.g., Rhodes et al., 1986; Tomczyk et al.,
1995).
The perhaps most extensively developed technique for
spatially resolved observation is derived from the socalled Fourier Tachometer (e.g., Brown, 1984). Here the

A conceptually very simple way to study the oscillations is to observe them in broad-band intensity or irradiance. In practice, fluctuations in the Earth’s atmosphere
render such observations very difficult from the ground;
however, the technique has been highly successful from
space (e.g., Woodard and Hudson, 1983; Toutain and
Fröhlich, 1992).
A very substantial number of helioseismic observing facilities have been established (see also the review by Duvall, 1995). To limit effects of gaps in the data, networks
of observing stations are used. The BiSON (Birmingham
Solar Oscillation Network; Chaplin et al., 1996) network was established in 1981 and now consists of six stations; it carries out disk-averaged velocity observations
by means of potassium-vapour resonant-scattering cells.
Spatially resolved velocity observations are obtained with
the GONG (Global Oscillation Network Group; Harvey
et al., 1996) six-station network, based on the Fouriertachometer technique, which has been operational since
1995; this is funded by the US National Science Foun21

Imager; Scherrer et al., 1995; Rhodes et al., 1997) uses
a technique based on the Fourier Tachometer, the spectral bands being defined by a pair of tunable Michelson
interferometers. This provides observations of Doppler
velocity over the entire solar disk with a spatial resolution of 2 arc sec, corresponding to independent velocity
measurements over a total number of about 800 000 locations, allowing detailed study of oscillations of degrees
up to about 1000.

dation, but involves a large international collaboration.
Valuable data are also being provided by the LOWL instrument of the High Altitude Observatory (Tomczyk
et al., 1995) on Mauna Loa, Hawaii, using a magnetooptical filter; this has recently been extended to a twostation network, with the addition of an instrument on
Tenerife, in the Canary Islands. Other ground-based networks include the IRIS (Fossat, 1991) and TON (Chou
et al., 1995) networks.

B. Analysis of oscillation data

Regardless of the observing technique, the signal contains contributions from the broad range of modes that
are excited in the Sun (cf. Section V.F). The goal of the
analysis is to extract from this signal, as a function of position on the solar disk and time, information about the
properties of the solar interior, such as the structure and
internal motions, and about the properties of the excitation of the oscillations. In principle, this may be thought
of as fitting to the observations an overall model encompassing all the relevant features. In practice, the analysis
must be carried out in several steps, at each step taking
into account the properties of the intermediate data resulting from the preceding steps.
Here I concentrate on the determination of the properties of global modes of solar oscillation, most importantly their oscillation frequencies ωnlm , and the subsequent analysis of the frequencies. Alternative analysis
techniques, aimed at investigating local properties of the
solar interior, are discussed in Section X.

FIG. 8. Doppler images obtained with the MDI instrument
(Scherrer et al., 1995). To the left is the original image, with
a greyscale ranging from −2000 m s−1 (dark) to 2000 m s−1
(light). This is dominated by solar rotation. After removing rotation by averaging (right-hand image) the mottling associated primarily with solar oscillations becomes apparent;
here the greyscale ranges from −500 m s−1 (dark) to 500 m s−1
(light).

Space observations from a suitable orbit completely
avoid the problem of periodic interruptions of the data.
Major contributions have been made from the SOHO
spacecraft (Domingo et al., 1995), a joint project between
ESA and NASA; it was launched in 1995 and started scientific observations in 1996 from an orbit close to the
first Lagrange point between the Earth and the Sun.
SOHO carries three helioseismic instruments. GOLF
(Global Oscillations at Low Frequency; Gabriel et al.,
1995, 1997) aims in particular at detecting low-frequency
modes, possibly including g modes, in disk-averaged observations. It was designed as a resonant-scattering
Doppler-velocity instrument, using sodium vapour; however technical problems have led to the observations now
being carried out in intensity variations in the blue wing
of the sodium spectral line. VIRGO (Variability of solar IRradiance and Gravity Oscillations; Fröhlich et al.,
1995, 1997) measures solar irradiance, disk-integrated intensities in three different wavelength regions, and intensity with limited spatial resolution. An important goal of
the instrument is again the search for g modes, with the
hope that these might be more easily detectable in intensity data than in velocity data. Finally, the SOI/MDI
(Solar Oscillations Investigation – Michelson Doppler

1. Spatial analysis

The first substantial step in the analysis is to separate
as far as possible the contributions from the individual
spherical harmonics Ylm . Oscillations in broad-band or
line intensity behave essentially as spherical harmonics
as functions of θ and φ on the solar disk. For observations in Doppler velocity, the signal is the projection of
the velocity field on the line of sight. The surface velocity
field for a single mode is determined by Eqs (22) and (23)
and is characterized by the ratio ξh (R)/ξr (R). It may be
shown, however, that at the observed solar frequencies
and low or moderate degree the oscillations are predominantly in the radial direction. Thus it is common in the
analyses to ignore the horizontal component of velocity.
Here I consider Doppler observations in more detail,
assuming the velocity to be purely in the radial direction.
For simplicity I furthermore take the axis of the spherical
harmonics to be in the plane of the sky, orthogonal to the
line of sight. Then the observed Doppler signal VD can
be written as

22

VD (θ, φ, t) = sin θ cos φ

X

n,l,m

Anlm clm Plm (cos θ) ×

< 4, with no explicit separamodes of low degree, l ∼
tion between the azimuthal orders (e.g., Dziembowski,
1977; Christensen-Dalsgaard and Gough, 1982). However, since the solar rotation axis is always close to the
plane of the sky, it follows from the symmetry of the
spherical harmonics that such observations are essentially
insensitive to modes where l − m is odd.
In practice, the analysis involves a number of steps.
The observed solar Dopplergram is transferred to a colatitude – longitude grid aligned with the solar rotation
axis, taking into account the variation with time of the
orientation of the rotation axis relative to the observer.
Also, to speed up the calculation of the required very
large number of integrals in Eq. (68) the integration in
longitude φ is carried out by means of a Fast Fourier
Transform. Some details of these procedures were described by Brown (1985, 1988).

(67)

× cos[mφ − ωnlm t − βnlm ] .
Here the factor sin θ cos φ arises from the projection of
the velocity onto the line of sight. To isolate modes corresponding to a given spherical harmonic, with (l, m) =
(l0 , m0 ), say, the signal is integrated over the area A of
the solar disk, with a suitable weight Wl0 m0 (θ, φ), yielding
Z
(68)
VD (θ, φ, t)Wl0 m0 (θ, φ)dA
Vl0 m0 (t) =
A
X
=
Sl0 m0 lm Anlm cos[ωnlm t + βnlm,l0 m0 ] .
n,l,m

The response function Sl0 m0 lm and the combined phase
βnlm,l0 m0 are obtained from integrals of the projected
spherical harmonics weighted by Wl0 m0 .
The goal of this spatial analysis is obviously to isolate
a single spherical harmonic in the time string Vl0 m0 (t),
i.e., to have, as far as possible, that Sl0 m0 lm ∝ δl0 l δm0 m ,
where δij is the Kronecker delta. From the orthogonality
of the Ylm over the unit sphere, it may be expected that
0
is suitable. Indeed, had data been availWl0 m0 ≃ Ylm
0
able over the entire solar surface, and apart from the
velocity projection factor, complete isolation of a single
spherical harmonic would have been possible. In practice, however, Vl0 m0 (t) contains contributions also from
neighboring (l, m). This so-called leakage substantially
complicates the subsequent determination of the oscillation frequencies. Examples of the leakage matrix Sl0 m0 lm
are illustrated in Fig. 9.

FIG. 10. Power spectrum of velocity observations from the
SOI/MDI experiment on the SOHO spacecraft. The ridges
of power concentration correspond to separate radial orders,
starting at the lowest frequency with the f mode, with n = 0.

2. Temporal analysis

The next step in the analysis is to isolate the individual modes, characterized by radial orders n, in the time
string Vl0 m0 (t). This is done through Fourier analysis of
Vl0 m0 (t). The result can be illustrated in a so-called l − ν
diagram, such as is shown in Fig. 10, where the power is
plotted against target degree l0 and frequency16 ν. This
clearly shows the concentration of power in ridges, each
corresponding to a given value of n (cf. Fig. 3). A clearer

FIG. 9. Leakage matrices Sl0 m0 lm for (l0 , m0 ) = (10, 0) (circles) and (l0 , m0 ) = (10, 10) (diamonds), as functions of
(l, m). The size of the symbols is proportional to Sl0 m0 lm .

A special case of weighting is obtained in disk-averaged
observations; in this case the signal is dominated by

16
It is conventional to analyze observed frequencies in terms
of cyclic frequencies ν = ω/2π.

23

impression of the power distribution is obtained by plotting the power as a function of frequency, for a given target degree. As a special example, Fig. 11 shows a power
spectrum obtained from disk-averaged observations from
the BiSON network. It is evident that the power is indeed
concentrated in very narrow peaks, hardly resolved at
low frequencies; this reflects the intrinsic damping times
of the modes which at the lowest frequencies exceed several months. At the maximum power, the amplitude per
mode is around 15 cm s−1 . It should be noticed also that
the spectrum reflects the asymptotic frequency behavior
for low-degree p modes [cf. Eqs (47) and (48)]: thus several cases of pairs of modes with l = 0, 2 or l = 1, 3 can
be identified.
From such spectra, the frequencies and other parameters of the individual modes can be obtained by fitting.
This must take into account the statistical nature of the
power distribution, resulting from the stochastic excitation (cf. Section V.F), and assuming a parametrized form
of the average line profile; although in principle asymmetrical profiles should be considered, most analyses to date
have been based on Lorentzian profiles characterized by
their widths and amplitudes (but see Toutain et al., 1998;
Chaplin et al., 1999a; Thiery et al., 2000). The fits are
further complicated by the leakage of power from other
(l, m) into the spectrum being analyzed.17

To illustrate the quality of present data on solar oscillations, Fig. 12 shows observed mean multiplet frequencies νnl , obtained from the MDI instrument (Kosovichev
et al., 1997). Over a large part of the diagram the errors, even when multiplied by 1000, are barely visible;
the relative error σ(ν)/ν is below 5 × 10−6 for more than
1000 multiplets. It is this extreme accuracy, in measured
quantities related directly to the properties of the solar
interior, which allows detailed investigations of solar internal structure.
The ridges in Fig. 12 extend to a limit where the natural line width of the modes is comparable to the separation between modes of adjacent degree; beyond this
limit neighboring modes partially merge as a result of
the spatial leakage, and a strict separation of modes
in frequency becomes difficult or impossible (Howe and
Thompson, 1998). At higher degree the mode frequencies
must be inferred from the location of ridges containing
overlapping contributions from several modes, the relative importance of which depend on the leakage matrix.
Thus the frequency determination requires accurate calculation of the leakage matrix, taking also the horizontal
component of velocity into account (e.g., Rabello-Soares
et al., 2001). Although progress has been made in this
area (e.g., Rhodes et al., 2001), more work is required for
the determination of fully reliable high-degree frequencies.

FIG. 11. Power spectrum of solar oscillations, obtained from
Doppler observations in light integrated over the disk of the
Sun. The ordinate is normalized to show velocity power per
frequency bin. The data were obtained from six observing
stations and span approximately four months. (See Elsworth
et al., 1995a.)

FIG. 12. Observed mean multiplet frequencies of solar oscillations, from 144 days of MDI observations. The error bars
correspond to 1000 standard deviations. The smallest relative
errors σ(ν)/ν are below 3 × 10−6 .

The frequency splittings ∆νnlm = νnlm − νnl contain information about solar internal rotation and other
possible departures from spherical symmetry (cf. Section V.E). Although full utilization of the information
contained in the oscillation data requires use of the individual frequencies νnlm , the determination of these frequencies is often difficult or impossible. Thus it is cus-

17

For descriptions of the analysis techniques and the complications encountered, see for example Anderson et al. (1990),
Schou (1992), Hill et al. (1996), Appourchaux, Gizon &
Rabello-Soares (1998), and Appourchaux, Rabello-Soares &
Gizon (1998); an overview was provided by Schou (1998b).

24

(cf. Eq. 62), and then discuss the techniques that are
applied in more realistic cases.

tomary to represent the frequency splittings by polynomial expansions
νnlm = νnl0 +

jX
max
j=1

(l)

aj (n, l) Pj (m) ,

(69)

1. Principles of inversion

In the simple rotational inversion problem the data are
of the form
Z R
∆i =
Ki (r)Ω(r)dr + ǫi ,
i = 1, . . . , M , (70)

in terms of the so-called a coefficients aj (n, l); here the
(l)
Pj are polynomials of degree j which satisfy the orthogP
(l)
(l)
onality relation m Pi (m)Pj (m) = 0 for i 6= j (e.g.,
Ritzwoller and Lavely, 1991; Schou et al., 1994). Explicit
expressions for these polynomials were given by Pijpers
(1997). It follows from Section V.E that to lowest order rotation gives rise to odd a coefficients. The even a
coefficients correspond to departures from spherical symmetry in solar structure, as well as to quadratic effects of
rotation.

0

where, for notational simplicity, I represent the pair (n, l)
by the single index i; M is the number of modes in the
data set considered, ∆i is the scaled rotational splitting
−1
m−1 βnl
δωnlm , and ǫi is the observational error in ∆i .
The goal of the inversion is to determine an approximation Ω̄(r0 ) to the true angular velocity, as a function of
position r0 in the Sun. Inversion is often carried out
through linear operations on the data. Hence for each r0
there exists a set of inversion coefficients ci (r0 ) such that

3. Solar g modes?

As discussed in Section V.C.4, observation of g modes
would provide very important information about the
properties of the solar core. Indeed, the search for solar g
modes has been an important theme in the development
of helioseismology. The early indications of a 160-min signal in solar data (cf. Section II) hinted that such modes
might be present and led to continued efforts to detect
them. An important aspect in these searches was the
uniform period spacing that is predicted by asymptotic
theory (e.g., Delache and Scherrer, 1983; Fröhlich and
Delache, 1984). Unfortunately, although further indications of g modes were presented by Gabriel et al. (1998),
the reality of these detections, and the precise nature of
the modes, has not yet been definitely established. In
particular, Appourchaux et al. (2000a), analyzing several different data sets, obtained stringent upper limits
to the amplitudes of solar g modes, substantially lower
than the early claims and barely consistent with the results of Gabriel et al. (1998).

Ω̄(r0 ) =

X

ci (r0 )∆i =

Z

0

i

R

K(r0 , r)Ω(r)dr ,

(71)

using Eq. (70) and ignoring the error; here the averaging
kernel K(r0 , r) is given by
X
ci (r0 )Ki (r) .
(72)
K(r0 , r) =
i

The inversion coefficients and averaging kernels clearly
depend on the choice of inversion method, and of possible parameters that enter into the method; indeed, the
inversion may be thought of as a way to determine coefficients and averaging kernels such as to obtain as much
information about the angular velocity as possible.
The averaging kernels provide an indication of the resolution of the inversion; it is clearly desirable to achieve
averaging kernels that are sharply peaked around r = r0 ,
and with small amplitude far away from that point. The
inversion coefficients give information about the propagation of errors from the data to the solution Ω̄(r0 ). In
particular, if the errors ǫi are assumed to be uncorrelated, with standard errors σ(∆i ), the standard error in
the result of the inversion satisfies
X
ci (r0 )2 σ(∆i )2 .
(73)
σ[Ω̄(r0 )]2 =

C. Helioseismic inversion

Given the observed frequencies, an important goal is
to infer localized properties about the solar interior from
them through inversion. Several inversion techniques
have been developed for this purpose.18 Here I first illustrate general principles by considering the somewhat
idealized case of inference of a spherically symmetric angular velocity Ω(r) from observed rotational splittings

i

The optimization of the inversion techniques requires a
trade-off between width of the averaging kernels and the
error.
In the techniques of optimally localized averages, developed by Backus and Gilbert (1970), the coefficients
ci (r0 ) are chosen such as to make K(r0 , r) approximate
as far as possible a delta function δ(r−r0 ) centered on r0 ;

18
For reviews, see, for example, Gough and Thompson
(1991), and Gough (1996a).

25

then Ω̄(r0 ) provides an approximation to Ω(r0 ). In one
version this is achieved by determining the coefficients
ci (r0 ) such as to minimize
Z R
X
J (r0 , r)K(r0 , r)2 dr + µ
ci (r0 )2 σ(∆i )2 , (74)
0

example, Craig and Brown, 1986). Here the solution Ω̄(r)
is parameterized, for example as a piecewise constant
function on a grid r0 < r1 < . . . < rN , with Ω̄(r) = Ωj on
the interval [rj−1 , rj ]; the parameters Ωj are determined
through a least-squares fit to the data. In general, this
procedure is regularized to obtain a smooth solution, by
including in the minimization a term which restricts the
square of Ω̄, or the square of its first or second derivative.
Thus, for example one may minimize
"Z
#2
R
X
σ(∆i )−2
Ki (r)Ω̄(r)dr − ∆i

i

subject to the constraint
Z R
K(r0 , r)dr = 1 .

(75)

0

Here J (r0 , r) is a weight function which is small close
to r = r0 and large elsewhere; a common choice is
J (r0 , r) = (r − r0 )2 . Furthermore, µ is a parameter
which, as discussed below, must be adjusted to optimize
the result.
Minimizing the first term in the expression (74) subject to Eq. (75) ensures that K(r0 , r) is large close to r0 ,
where the weight function J (r0 , r) is small, and small
elsewhere. This is precisely the required “delta-ness” of
the combined kernel. The effect of the second term in
Eq. (74) is to restrict σ 2 (Ω̄). The size of µ determines
the relative importance of the localization and the size of
the variance in the result. Hence, µ must be determined
to ensure a trade-off between the localization and the
error, measured by the width of K(r0 , r) and σ[Ω̄(r0 )],
respectively.
Pijpers and Thompson (1992, 1994) developed a computationally more efficient method, where the inversion
coefficients are determined by matching K(r0 , r) to a prescribed target function T (r0 , r). They dubbed this the
SOLA technique (for Subtractive Optimally Localized
Averaging), to distinguish it from the MOLA technique
(for Multiplicative Optimally Localized Averaging) discussed above. Specifically, the coefficients ci (r0 ) are determined by minimizing
Z R
X
ci (r0 )2 σ(∆i )2 , (76)
[K(r0 , r) − T (r0 , r)]2 dr + µ
0

0

i

+µ2

Z

0

R



d2 Ω̄
dr2

2

dr ,

(77)

where in the last term a suitable discretized approximation to d2 Ω̄/dr2 , in terms of the Ωj , is used. The
minimization of Eq. (77) clearly leads to a set of linear equations for Ω̄j , defining the solution; however, it
is still the case that the solution is linearly related to
the data and hence is characterized by inversion coefficients and averaging kernels (cf. Eq. 71). By restricting
the second derivative the last term in Eq. (77) suppresses
rapid oscillations in the solution, and hence ensures that
it is smooth; the weight µ2 given to this term serves as
a trade-off parameter, determining the balance between
resolution and error for this method.
Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1990) made a comparison of different inversion techniques as applied to this
problem, in terms of their error and resolution properties. Useful insight into the properties of inversion techniques can be obtained from analyzing the inverse problem by means of (Generalized) Singular Value Decomposition (e.g., Hansen, 1990, 1994; Christensen-Dalsgaard
et al., 1993). This can also be used to develop efficient algorithms for the inversion, through pre-processing of the
problem (Christensen-Dalsgaard and Thompson, 1993;
Basu et al., 1997a).
It is evidently important to consider the statistical
properties of the inferences obtained through helioseismic inversion. This requires reliable information about
the statistics of the data (oscillation frequencies or frequency splittings), which may not always be available.
An important example is correlation between data errors;
although the correlation matrix has been estimated in a
few cases (e.g., Schou et al., 1995), off-diagonal elements
are generally not taken into account in the inversion. Yet
it was demonstrated by Gough (1996a) and Gough and
Sekii (2002) that this might have serious effects on the
inferences. Howe and Thompson (1996) noted the importance of taking into account also the error correlation between different points in the inference. Careful
evaluations of statistical aspects of helioseismic inversion
were provided by Genovese et al. (1995) and Gough et
al. (1996a).

i

where again µ is a trade-off parameter. In addition, the
width of T (r0 , r) functions as a parameter, in most cases
depending on r0 , of the method.19 As before, the inclusion of the last term in Eq. (76) serves to limit the error in
the solution. An important advantage of the technique is
the ability to choose the target function such as to tailor
the averaging kernels to have specific properties.
A second commonly used class of techniques are the
regularized least-squares, or Tikhonov, methods (see, for

19

It was argued by Thompson (1993) that for inversion of
acoustic data the resolution width is proportional to the local
sound speed c; thus the target width is often chosen to be
proportional to c(r0 ).

26

Basu and Thompson (1996) this allows tests for possible
systematic errors in the data through investigation of the
residuals. However, most inversions for solar structure
differences have applied generalizations of the optimallylocalized average techniques, by constructing linear combinations of the relations (59) with coefficient ci (r0 ) chosen to isolate a specific feature of the structure. To infer δr c2 /c2 , for example, this is achieved with the SOLA
method by replacing the expression (76) to be minimized
by

2. Inversion for solar rotation

In reality, we wish to infer the solar internal angular velocity Ω(r, θ) as a function of both distance r to
the center and co-latitude θ. Inversions to do so can be
based directly on Eq. (61), although quite often the expansion of the rotational splittings in a coefficients (cf.
Eq. 69) is used; it is straightforward to show that the
odd a coefficients are related to Ω(r, θ) by relations similar to Eq. (61), with kernels that may be determined
from the kernels Knlm (r, θ). The inversion methods discussed above can be immediately generalized to the twodimensional case of inferring functions of (r, θ), including
the definitions of inversion coefficients and averaging kernels (e.g., Schou et al., 1994). The main difficulty, compared to the one-dimensional case, is the amount of data
that must be dealt with; while inversion for solar structure, based on average multiplet frequencies, requires the
analysis of typically at most a few thousand frequencies,
the splittings or a coefficients used for rotational inversion number tens of thousands. For this reason early investigations were typically carried out with the so-called
1.5-dimensional methods (e.g., Brown et al., 1989) where
Ω(r, θ) was expanded suitably in θ, reducing the problem
to a series of one-dimensional inversions for the expansion coefficients as functions of r. However, with the
development of computer power, and even more with the
development of efficient algorithms taking advantage of
the detailed structure of the problem (e.g., Larsen, 1997;
Larsen and Hansen, 1997), the fully two-dimensional inversions are entirely feasible and commonly used. An
overview of inversion methods and further references were
given by Schou et al. (1998), who also carried out tests
of the inversion procedures based on artificial data.

Z

R

2
Kc2 ,ρ (r0 , r) − T (r0 , r) dr + β
0
X
σi ci (r0 )cj (r0 ) ,
+µ


Z

R
0

Cρ,c2 (r0 , r)2 dr
(78)

i

where again i numbers the multiplets (n, l), and σi is the
standard error of δωi /ωi . Here the averaging kernel is
now
X
ci (r0 )Kci2 ,ρ (r)
(79)
Kc2 ,ρ (r0 , r) =
i

and I have introduced the cross-term kernel
X
i
ci (r0 )Kρ,c
Cρ,c2 (r0 , r) =
2 (r) ,

(80)

i

which controls the (undesired) contribution of δr ρ/ρ to
the solution. As in the rotation case, the minimization
of the expression (78) ensures that Kc2 ,ρ (r0 , r) approximates the target T (r0 , r) while suppressing the contributions from the cross term and the data errors; the effect
of the term in Fsurf is reduced by chosing the coefficients
to satisfy in addition the constraints
X
ci (r0 )Ii−1 ψλ (ωi ) = 0 , λ = 0, . . . , Λ ,
(81)

3. Inversion for solar structure

i

for a suitably chosen set of functions ψλ , typically taken
to be polynomials of order λ (e.g., Däppen et al., 1991;
Kosovichev et al., 1992). A detailed discussion of implementation details, including the choice of the trade-off
parameters β and µ and of the properties of the target
function, was provided by Rabello-Soares et al. (1999).
For high-degree modes the surface effects are no longer
functions of frequency alone, as demonstrated by Brodsky & Vorontsov (1993). Di Mauro et al. (2002) have
developed a generalization of the constraints (81), based
on the asymptotic expressions of Brodsky & Vorontsov,
allowing suppression of the surface term for modes of degree as high as 1000. The resulting inversion enabled
resolution of the upper few per cent of the solar radius,
including the helium and parts of the hydrogen ionization
zones, of great interest in connection with investigation
of the equation of state of the solar plasma (see also Section VII.B).

Inversion for solar structure is conceptually more complicated than the rotational inversion. In the case of rotation, the basic relation between the unknown angular
velocity and the data is linear to a high approximation.
In the structure case, on the other hand, the corresponding relation between structure and multiplet frequencies
is highly nonlinear. This is dealt with through linearization, on the assumption that a solar model is available
which is sufficiently close to the actual solar structure;
then the inversion can be based on Eq. (59). This is of a
form similar to the simple inverse problem in Eq. (70), although with additional terms, and can be analyzed using
extensions of the methods discussed in Section VI.C.1.
Least-squares inversion can be carried out by
parametrizing the unknown functions δr c2 /c2 , δr ρ/ρ and
Fsurf , the parameters being determined through regularized least-squares fitting similar to Eq. (77) (e.g., Dziembowski et al., 1990; Antia and Basu, 1994a); as shown by
27

and the model could be interpreted as a deficit in the
opacity in the model, as was subsequently confirmed by
the opacity calculations by, for example, Iglesias et al.
(1992).
Equations (37) and (38) were derived from a very simple form of the asymptotic analysis, and hence the resulting inversion suffers from systematic errors. These can
be substantially reduced by basing the inverse analysis on
higher-order or otherwise improved asymptotic descriptions (e.g., Vorontsov and Shibahashi, 1991; Marchenkov
et al., 2000), maintaining the advantage of being independent of a solar model. Alternatively, the systematic errors can to some extent be eliminated by carrying out a differential asymptotic inversion, based on
a fit of Eq. (49) to frequency differences between the
Sun and a model (Christensen-Dalsgaard, Gough, and
Thompson, 1989); given the resulting H1 (w), Eq. (51)
may be inverted analytically to infer the sound-speed
difference between the Sun and the model. This technique was used by Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1991)
to determine the depth of the solar convection zone as
dcz = (0.287 ± 0.003)R, a result also obtained independently by Kosovichev and Fedorova (1991); the inference
has later been confirmed and substantially tightened by
Basu and Antia (1997) and Basu (1998) from fits of
H1 (w) to sequences of models. Using the differential
asymptotic technique, Christensen-Dalsgaard, Proffitt,
and Thompson (1993) demonstrated that the inclusion
of helium settling very substantially reduced the soundspeed differences between solar models and the Sun.

VII. HELIOSEISMIC INVESTIGATION OF SOLAR
STRUCTURE

The average multiplet frequencies νnl carry information about the spherically symmetric component of solar
structure. This can be used to test solar models and obtain information about the properties of matter in the
solar interior. As noted in Section V.B only quantities
such as density ρ, adiabatic exponent Γ1 or sound speed
c are immediately constrained by the frequencies; constraints on other aspects of the solar interior structure
require further assumptions about the models.
Already the early observations of high-degree modes
(Deubner, 1975; Rhodes et al., 1977) provided significant
constraints on the solar interior. Although these modes
are trapped in the outer part of the convection zone,
they are sensitive to its general adiabatic structure, and
comparison between the observed and computed frequencies indicated that the convection zone was deeper than
previously assumed (Gough, 1977b; Ulrich and Rhodes,
1977). Furthermore, it was pointed out that the frequencies were sensitive to details of the equation of state (e.g.,
Berthomieu et al., 1980; Lubow et al., 1980). The detection of low-degree modes, penetrating to the solar core,
allowed tests of more profound aspects of the models, including effects of changes aimed at reducing the neutrino
flux (cf. Section IV.B). An early result was the likely
exclusion of solar models with abundances of helium and
heavier elements substantially below the standard values
(Christensen-Dalsgaard and Gough, 1980b). Elsworth et
al. (1990) obtained strong evidence against non-standard
models involving either mixing or energy transport by
weakly interacting massive particles. More generally, it
is now clear that all models that have been proposed
to reduce the solar neutrino flux to the observed values
through modifications to solar structure are inconsistent
with the helioseismic data.
The determination of frequencies for a broad range degrees by Duvall and Harvey (1983) opened up the possibility for inversions to determine the structure of substantial parts of the solar interior. Gough (1984a) noted
that Eq. (38) for the function F (w), determined from observed quantities by Eq. (37), could be inverted, without
any reference to a solar model, to determine the sound
speed c as a function of r.20 This was applied to solar data by Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1985) to infer
the sound speed in much of the solar interior, testing
the method by applying it to frequencies of solar models. The results showed clear indications of the base of
the convection zone, as a change in curvature in c(r); the
discrepancies in the radiative interior between the Sun

A. Inferences of sound speed and density

I now consider in more details the results of inferring
solar internal structure from the oscillation frequencies.
In much of the discussion I use as reference Model S of
Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (1996); this falls within the
category of ‘standard solar models’ (see Section IV.A)
and has been used quite extensively in helioseismic investigations.
The simplest way to test a solar model is to consider
differences between observed frequencies and those of
the model. In Fig. 13, panel (a) shows relative differences between observed frequencies presented by Basu
et al. (1997b) and those of Model S. Although there is
some scatter, the differences depend predominantly on
frequency, and furthermore they are quite small at low
frequency. According to Section V.D this suggests that
the dominant contributions to the differences are located
in the near-surface layers of the model. This is confirmed
by considering differences scaled by Qnl (panel b), where
most of the scatter has been suppressed. Indeed, giving
the simplifications involved in the modeling of the nearsurface structure, and the use of adiabatic frequencies,

20
A very similar technique for geophysical inversion was presented by Brodskiı̌ and Levshin (1977).

28

has indeed succeeded in resolving the sound-speed difference between the Sun and the model in considerable
detail. Also, the 1-σ formal errors in the results are extremely small, below 2 × 10−4 in the bulk of the model,
owing to the precision of the observed multiplet frequencies. Other, similar results were obtained by, for example,
Gough et al. (1996b) and Kosovichev et al. (1997).

it is hardly surprising that differences of this magnitude
are obtained.

FIG. 13. (a) Relative frequency differences, in the sense (observation) – (model). The observations are a combination of
BiSON whole-disk measurements (e.g., Elsworth et al., 1994)
and LOWL observations (Tomczyk et al., 1995), as described
by Basu et al. (1997b), while the computed frequencies are
for Model S. (b) The same, but scaled by the inertia ratio
Qnl (see Section V.D). (c) Scaled differences after subtraction of the fitted H2 (ν), plotted against νnl /(l + 1/2) which
determines the lower turning point rt , shown as the upper
abscissa.

Even after scaling, there remains some scatter in the
differences, suggesting a dependence on the depth of penetration of the mode and hence the presence of differences between the structure of the Sun and the model
that are not confined to the near-surface layers. These
effects can be isolated by subtracting a function of frequency fitted to the points in Fig. 13b. The residual (see
Fig. 13c) is clearly highly systematic; the small intrinsic
scatter reflects both the extremely small observational
error and the extent to which frequency differences can
be represented by Eq. (49). It is evident that the behavior changes drastically for modes penetrating just be< 0.7;
neath the base of the convection zone, with rt /R ∼
this suggests that there may be substantial differences
between the Sun and the model in this region.
Inversion for the differences in structure, without making asymptotic approximations, was discussed in Section VI.C.3. Typical results of such inversions, using the
SOLA method, are shown in Fig. 14. To illustrate the
resolution properties of the inversion, panel (c) shows selected averaging kernels. It is evident that the inversion

FIG. 14. Results of sound-speed inversion. (a) Difference in
squared sound speed, in the sense (Sun) – (model), inferred
from inversion of the differences between the observed BiSON and LOWL frequencies and the frequencies of two solar
models: closed circles are for Model S, and open circles for
a similar model, but ignoring element diffusion and settling.
(b) Results for Model S, on an expanded scale. The vertical
error bars are 1-σ errors on the inferred differences, while the
horizontal bars provide a measure of the resolution of the inversion. (c) Selected averaging kernels K(r0 , r), for fractional
target radii r0 /R = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9. (Adapted
from Basu et al., 1997b.)

The inferred difference between the solar and the
Model S sound speed (cf. Fig. 14b) is striking. First of
all, the overall magnitude should be noted: the difference
is everywhere below about 5 × 10−3 , indicating that c2
of the model agrees with that of the Sun to within 0.5
29

per cent from below 0.1R to very near the surface. It is
important to recall that the model calculation contains
no free parameters which have been adjusted to achieve
this level of agreement. It is true that the computation
of solar models has been improved as a result of the constraints imposed by the steadily improving helioseismic
data, through the inclusion of settling as well as through
improved equation of state and opacities; as an example,
Fig. 14a compares inversion relative to Model S with the
use of a corresponding model which does not include diffusion and settling. In this sense the current models have
been developed as a result of the helioseismic data. However, the improvements in physics have not been tailored
towards fitting the data; it is remarkable that they have
nonetheless resulted in a fit as good as the one shown in
Fig. 14b.
It should noticed, however, that the differences, although small, are highly significant. Particularly prominent is the peak in δr c2 /c2 just below the convection zone.
This is a feature shared by all recent investigations, based
on a variety of data and ‘standard’ solar model calculations; interestingly, recent updates to the opacities and
the solar initial composition have tended to increase the
discrepancies between the Sun and standard solar models. Similarly, the negative δr c2 /c2 around r = 0.2R is a
common feature to most inferences. On the other hand,
< 0.1R, show some
the results in the inner core, for r ∼
variation between different data sets, although the inferred differences are in all cases of a magnitude similar
to that shown in Fig. 14b. The inferences certainly show
that standard calculations are inadequate. I return to
possible causes for the discrepancies in Section XI.
Extensive comparisons have been carried out between
solar models and the results of helioseismic inversions, to
investigate effects of changes in the physics of the solar
interior.21 Basu et al. (2000) showed that the inferred
solar structure depends little on the assumed reference
model, thus confirming that the linearization in Eq. (59)
is justified. A detailed analysis of the sensitivity of the
helioseismic results to the composition profile and aspects
of the nuclear energy generation was presented by TurckChièze et al. (2001b).
Although the most general information about the solar interior is obtained from inverse analyses, as discussed
above, other techniques may be more sensitive to specific
features of the solar interior. In particular, localized features in the Sun cause oscillatory perturbations in the
frequencies, as a function of mode order, resulting from
the change in the phase of the eigenfunctions at the lo-

cation of the feature as the order is varied (e.g., Gough,
1990). An interesting example is the rapid change in
the temperature gradient at the base of the convection
zone, which has a distinct signature in the oscillation frequencies. Analyses of the observed frequencies have been
used to show that convective penetration into the radiative region below the convection zone, at least assuming
a relatively simple model of the resulting structure, has
at most a very limited extent (e.g., Basu et al., 1994;
Monteiro et al., 1994; Roxburgh and Vorontsov, 1994b).
B. Physics and composition of the solar interior

The precision of the observed frequencies allows us to
go beyond the determination of the sound speed, to investigate finer details of the physics of the solar interior.
An important aspect is the equation of state, particularly
in the regions of partial ionization which to a large extent are found in the convection zone. This part of the
Sun has substantial advantages for helioseismic investigations: since the stratification is very nearly adiabatic,
apart from a thin region near the top, the structure of the
convection zone depends essentially only on the equation
of state and composition, while it is not directly affected
by the opacity. The potential for helioseismic determination of the convection-zone composition and tests of
the equation of state was recognized by Gough (1984b)
(see also Däppen and Gough, 1986). An important and
potentially detectable effect of the thermodynamic state
and composition arises from Γ1 which is suppressed relative to the value of 5/3 for a fully ionized ideal gas in
the zones of partial ionization of abundant elements (e.g.,
Däppen, 1998). In particular, determination of the helium abundance is in principle possible because the reduction in Γ1 in the second ionization zone of helium
obviously depends on the abundance of helium.
Investigations of these ionization zones can be carried
out in terms of the asymptotic description of the oscillations in Eqs (46) or (49), where the effects of the nearsurface regions are contained in the phase functions α(ω)
or H2 (ω).22 As discussed above, the relatively sharp variation of Γ1 in the second helium ionization zone causes
an oscillation in the frequencies, reflected in the phase
functions, of a magnitude that depends on the helium
abundance. Determinations of the solar envelope helium abundance by means of such asymptotic methods
were carried out by Vorontsov et al. (1991), Antia and

22

e.g., Brodskiı̌ and Vorontsov (1989), Baturin and Mironova
(1990), Marchenkov and Vorontsov (1990), Pamyatnykh et al.
(1991), Christensen-Dalsgaard and Pérez Hernández (1992),
Gough and Vorontsov (1995).

21

See, for example, Dziembowski et al. (1994), Richard et al.
(1996), Turck-Chièze et al. (1997), Brun et al. (1998, 1991),
Fiorentini et al. (1999), Morel et al. (1999), Bahcall et al.
(2001), Guzik et al. (2001), Neuforge-Verheecke et al. (2001).

30

Basu (1994b), and Pérez Hernández and ChristensenDalsgaard (1994). Furthermore, the phase functions may
provide powerful diagnostics of the equation of state in
the near-surface region (e.g., Vorontsov et al., 1992; Baturin et al., 2000).
To discuss the potential of helioseismology for testing
composition and thermodynamic properties, beyond the
asymptotic approximation, we note that the sound speed
is determined by p, ρ and Γ1 (cf. Eq. 29), where, in
turn, Γ1 = Γ1 (p, ρ, Y, Z) may be obtained from the thermodynamical properties of the gas and the composition;
allowance should be made, however, for a possible error
(δΓ1 )int in the equation of state used in the calculation
of the reference model, where (δΓ1 )int is the difference
in Γ1 between the values obtained with the solar and
the model equations of state, at fixed p, ρ, Y, Z.23 Then
Eq. (59) can be rewritten, expressing δr c2 in terms of
δr p, δr ρ, δr Y and (δΓ1 )int ; it is convenient to express the
result in terms of u = p/ρ, using also Eqs (2a) and (2b),
to obtain
Z
Z
δνnl
nl δr u
nl
= Ku,Y
dr + KY,u
δr Y dr
νnl
u


Z
δΓ1
Fsurf (νnl )
(82)
+ Kcnl2 ,ρ
dr +
Γ1 int
Inl

inference is sensitive to the relativistic effects in the treatment of the electrons, which were neglected in the original MHD equation of state used in the top panel, but
included in the corrected version used in the bottom
panel.24 Although this is a fairly trivial correction, it
does illustrate the sensitivity of the helioseismic inferences to subtle details of the equation of state.25

(see also Basu and Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1997). If it
is assumed that the model equation of state is adequate,
such that (δΓ1 /Γ1 )int is negligible, Eq. (82) may be inverted to determine δr Y in the helium ionization zones
(e.g., Kosovichev et al., 1992); since the convection zone
is fully mixed, this provides a measure of the convectionzone value Ye of the helium abundance. In a regularized least-squares inversion, for example, δr Y may be
assumed to be constant and hence taken outside the integral in equation Eq. (82) as a single parameter (e.g.,
Dziembowski et al., 1990, 1991).
In general, potential errors in the equation of state
must be taken into account. Basu and ChristensenDalsgaard (1997) showed how the differences in equation
of state might be taken explicitly into account in the inversion, albeit at the expense of an increase in the error
in the solution; they also pointed out that the inversion
might be carried out to determine the intrinsic difference
in Γ1 between the solar and model equations of state.
To illustrate the sensitivity of such investigations,
Fig. 15 shows the results of inversions for Γ1 in the entire solar interior (Elliot and Kosovichev, 1998). The
most striking aspect are the differences in the solar core
which are clearly resolved. These demonstrate that the

FIG. 15. The top figure shows the difference between Γ1 of a
solar model with the MHD equation of state and observation;
the bottom figure shows the result of including a relativistic
correction to MHD. The figures would be qualitatively similar
if OPAL had been used. (From Elliot and Kosovichev, 1998.)

Basu, Däppen, and Nayfonov (1999) made a careful
investigation of the equation of state in the convection
zone, determining intrinsic differences in Γ1 for several
different models using the OPAL or MHD equations of
state; this allows tests of these complex and conceptually
very different treatments of the thermodynamic state of
solar matter (cf. Section IV.A). Some results are illustrated in Fig. 16. Both equations of state clearly have
significant errors, particularly in the hydrogen and he> 0.9R; it appears that the
lium ionization zones, for r ∼
OPAL formulation is closer to the Sun in most of the region considered, although the situation may be reversed
in the outer 2 – 3 % of the radius. Investigations such as

24
Note that the average thermal energy of a particle in the
solar core, around 1.35 keV, is 0.3 % of the electron rest-mass
energy.
25
Gong et al. (2001) recently presented a version of the MHD
equation of state which includes relativistic effects for the
electrons.

23
For simplicity I neglect the effect of Z in the following; in
any case it is constrained (at least in the convection zone) by
the spectroscopic measurements.

31

these clearly have great potential for studying the complex thermodynamic processes in the solar interior, of
substantial value also for other applications of the properties of high-temperature plasmas.
Several recent determinations of the convection-zone
helium abundance Ye have been made from helioseismic
analysis, using both the MHD and the OPAL equations
of state. The values tend to be in the range 0.24 – 0.25,
with some dependence on the equation of state, the data
set and the analysis method (e.g., Basu and Antia, 1995;
Richard et al., 1998; Basu, 1998), although an OLA inversion by Kosovichev (1997) yielded rather more disparate values: Ye = 0.23 using MHD and Ye = 0.25
using OPAL. It is striking, in all these cases, that the
values obtained are substantially below the initial value
Y0 = 0.27 − 0.28 required to calibrate the models to have
the present solar luminosity. This confirms the importance of settling of helium which reduces the envelope
helium abundance during evolution; in fact, in Model
S the present value, Ye = 0.245, is in reasonably good
agreement with the helioseismic determinations. However, it is evident that the uncertainty resulting from
the possible errors in the equation of state requires further work; improved results on the helium abundance and
the properties of the equation of state may be expected
when reliable data on high-degree modes become available (e.g., Rabello-Soares et al., 2000; Di Mauro et al.,
2002).

in the core, the nuclear energy generation rates. Here,
furthermore, Γ1 has very little sensitivity to composition,
at the level of the present accuracy of the inversions; the
determination of the composition depends mainly on its
effects on the mean molecular weight µ and hence the
sound speed (cf. Eq. 33), assuming that the temperature
is essentially known. Thus further constraints, based on
the equations of stellar structure and the assumption of
the relevant physical properties, are required to infer the
composition profile. Gough and Kosovichev (1990) reformulated the inverse problem in terms of corrections
to composition, using the equations of stellar structure,
to determine the hydrogen abundance in the solar core.
This procedure was also adopted by Kosovichev (1997).
Alternatively, Eqs (2) can be solved, under the constraint
that the model sound speed match the helioseismic inference, but with no assumption about the hydrogenabundance profile X(r), which is then determined as
a result of the analysis (Shibahashi and Takata, 1996;
Antia and Chitre, 1998; Takata and Shibahashi, 1998).
The results of these analyses show considerable scatter,
but they generally confirm the gradient in the hydrogen abundance just below the convection zone found in
solar models, resulting from settling (cf. Fig. 1). However, there is a tendency for the gradient to be less steep,
indicating the presence of processes that might partly
counteract the settling. (For a summary of these results,
see Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1998.) As discussed in Section XI, weak mixing is indeed a possible explanation for
the bump in δr c2 /c2 just beneath the convection zone.
If the composition profile is assumed to be known, on
the other hand, other aspects of the solar interior may
be studied. Tripathy and Christensen-Dalsgaard (1998)
made a detailed investigation of the effects of opacity
modifications on solar structure and on this basis Tripathy et al. (1998) attempted to determine changes to the
opacity that could account for the inferred sound-speed
difference illustrated in Fig. 14b. The required changes,
of only a few per cent, were probably within the general
uncertainty in current opacity calculations, although it
is less clear whether their detailed behavior was physically realistic. There is little doubt, in any case, that the
explanation of the inferred sound-speed difference will require modifications both to the composition profile and
to the opacity.

FIG. 16. Relative difference between Γ1 obtained from an inversion of helioseismological data and Γ1 for two solar models.
in the sense “Sun – model”. Only the “intrinsic” difference
in Γ1 is shown, that is, the part of the difference due to the
equation of state (see text). Lines have been drawn through
the results to guide the eye. The closed circles connected by a
solid line are results obtained with an MHD model, the open
circles connected with a dashed line are results with an OPAL
model. (Adapted from Basu, Däppen, and Nayfonov, 1999.)

C. Helioseismology and the solar neutrino problem

As discussed in Section IV.B, the discrepancy between
the predicted and measured flux of solar neutrinos has
cast some doubt on calculations of solar models. The solar neutrino flux is very sensitive to the temperature of
the solar core. Thus only relatively modest changes to
the structure of the solar core, reducing the central temperature, are required to bring the computed neutrino

Beneath the convection zone, solar structure depends
on the equation of state, opacity, composition profile and,
32

seems little doubt of the existence of neutrino oscillations; also, the results provide independent confirmation
of the standard solar model. With this, the role of helioseismology in the investigations of solar neutrinos has
changed. Previously the main issue was to provide evidence for or against the standard solar models. Now,
the goal is to use helioseismology, together with other
relevant information about the solar core, to constrain
as far as possible the rate of neutrino generation in the
Sun27 ; together with the measurements on Earth of the
detection rate of various types of neutrinos this may offer
the best hope for constraining the properties of the neutrinos, such as masses and interaction parameters. The
importance of this to the further development of physics
is obvious.

flux into better agreement with the observations. This
is the background for the large number of attempts that
have been made to construct models with a reduced neutrino flux. It is clear, however, that the close agreement
between solar structure and a standard solar model suggests that such modifications are unlikely to be consistent
with the helioseismic inferences. The required reduction
by roughly a factor of two of the flux of high-energy neutrinos corresponds approximately to a reduction in the
central temperature of the Sun of about 3 per cent; if it
is assumed that other aspects of the model are roughly
unchanged, this corresponds to a similar decrease in c2 ,
which is in obvious conflict with the helioseismically inferred sound-speed difference (e.g., Bahcall et al., 1997).
Similar conclusions have been reached by a number of
other investigations.26 More careful analyses, determining limits on the neutrino flux given the helioseismic constraints, generally confirm this conclusion (e.g., Antia
and Chitre, 1997; Takata and Shibahashi, 1998); Watanabe and Shibahashi (2001) showed that, even assuming a
reduced core abundance of heavy elements, models could
not be constructed which were consistent with both the
neutrino and the helioseismic data. Also, Turck-Chièze
et al. (2001a) recently constructed a model essentially
consistent with the seismic data and demonstrated that
the neutrino emission from this model was very close to
that of a standard solar model.
It should be noted, none the less, that conclusions
based on helioseismology concerning the solar neutrino
production must be regarded with a little caution. Since
helioseismology essentially provides inferences of T /µ,
not of T and µ separately, a model might in principle be constructed where T and µ are both modified in
such a way that their ratio is unchanged, while the neutrino flux is reduced substantially. Some reduction in the
computed neutrino flux is also possible, without increasing the discrepancy in sound speed, by simply changing
the assumed nuclear reaction parameters suitably within
their error limits (e.g., Brun et al., 1998). Even so, the
helioseismic success of the normal solar models strongly
suggests that the solution to the neutrino problem should
be sought not in the physics of the solar interior but
rather in the physics of the neutrino.
This conclusion was dramatically confirmed by the
recent results from the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory which, when combined with data from the SuperKamiokande experiment, showed direct evidence for
solar-neutrino oscillations and yielded a total rate consistent within errors with standard models (Ahmad et
al., 2001; see Section IV.B). Given these results there

VIII. INFERENCES OF SOLAR INTERNAL ROTATION

The early inferences of solar internal rotation by Duvall et al. (1984) were based on predominantly sectoral
modes, with m ≃ ±l, and hence provided information
about the radial variation of rotation in a region around
the solar equator. In particular, they established that
the interior of the Sun rotates at approximately the same
speed as the surface, with no evidence for a rapidly rotating core. To determine the angular velocity Ω(r, θ) as
a function of both radius and latitude, through inversion
of Eq. (61), observations of rotational splitting as a function of the azimuthal order m are required. These became
available with the advent of fully two-dimensional observations of solar oscillations (Brown, 1985; Rhodes et al.,
1987; Libbrecht, 1988, 1989). Already the initial analyses of these data showed a striking variation of rotation
in the solar interior: the convection zone largely shared
the latitude variation observed on the surface (cf. Eq. 1),
with little variation with depth, whereas the radiative interior seemed to rotate like a solid body.28 This was at
variance with earlier models of the dynamics of the convection zone (cf. Section IV.C), and created problems for
the dynamo models of the solar magnetic activity (e.g.,
Gilman et al., 1989).

27
It was noted by Gough (2001bc) that this will require careful attention to the details of helioseismic inferences about the
solar core; in particular, departures from spherical symmetry
may have to be constrained.
28
e.g., Brown and Morrow (1987), Christensen-Dalsgaard
and Schou (1988), Kosovichev (1988), Brown et al. (1989),
Dziembowski et al. (1989), Rhodes et al. (1990), Thompson
(1990), Goode et al. (1991).

26
e.g., Dziembowski et al. (1994), Ricci et al. (1997), TurckChièze et al. (1998), Bahcall et al. (2001).

33

FIG. 17. Inferred rotation rate Ω/2π in a quadrant of the
Sun, obtained by means of SOLA inversion of 144 days of MDI
data. The equator is at the horizontal axis and the pole is at
the vertical axis, both axes being labelled by fractional radius.
Some contours are labelled in nHz, and, for clarity, selected
contours are shown as bold. The dashed circle is at the base
of the convection zone and the tick marks at the edge of the
outer circle are at latitudes 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦ , and 75◦ . The
shaded area indicates the region in the Sun where no reliable
inference can be made with the current data. (Adapted from
Schou et al., 1998.)

FIG. 18. Inferred rotation rate Ω/2π as a function of radius
at the latitudes indicated, obtained from inversion of 144 days
of MDI data. The circles with 1-σ error bars show results of
a SOLA inversion, while the dashed lines with 1-σ error band
were obtained with RLS inversion. The heavy vertical dashed
line marks the base of the convection zone. (Adapted from
Schou et al., 1998.)

The quality of the MDI data is such that finer details
in the rotation become very apparent. As was found
in earlier analyses, the angular velocity increases with
depth beneath the surface, at least at low latitude, the
maximum angular velocity occurring on the equator at a
depth of around 0.05 R. Korzennik et al. (1990), noting
the same feature in the equatorial rotation rate, pointed
out that this variation could be related to the different
rotation rates inferred from tracking of surface features,
assuming that these features were anchored at different
depths.
The tachocline is of very considerable dynamical interest, as providing the coupling between the latitudevarying rotation in the convection zone and the nearly
solid rotation below it. Furthermore, it seems likely that
the solar dynamo must operate in this region, with properties that depend sensitively on the details of the variation in angular velocity (e.g., Parker, 1993). The apparent width of the tachocline in Fig. 18 in part reflects
the finite resolution of the inversion, as determined by
the radial extent of the averaging kernels. This must be
taken into account in estimating the true width of the
tachocline. Estimates of the width and other properties
were made by Kosovichev (1996a) and Corbard et al.
(1998a, 1999). Charbonneau et al. (1999) applied several analysis techniques to LOWL data; they obtained a

Very extensive results on rotational splitting have been
obtained in the last few years.29 These include data from
the GONG network in the form of individual frequency
splittings, and from the SOI/MDI instrument on SOHO
in the form of a coefficients extending as high as a35 . As
discussed in Section VI.C.2, these observational developments have been accompanied by the development of
efficient inversion algorithms. Schou et al. (1998) carried
out analyses of the data from the first 144 days of data
from SOI/MDI using a variety of inversion techniques.
Figure 17 shows the inferred angular velocity, obtained
by means of SOLA inversion. To illustrate some of the
features of the solution more clearly, Fig. 18 shows cuts at
fixed latitudes. In accordance with the earlier results, the
angular velocity depends predominantly on latitude in
the convection zone, while there is little significant variation in the radiative interior. The transition between
these two regions, denoted the tachocline by Spiegel and
Zahn (1992), appears to be quite sharp, and to coincide
approximately with the base of the convection zone.

29

Examples of recent inferences of solar rotation are provided
by Thompson et al. (1996), Wilson et al. (1997), and Corbard
et al. (1997).

34

tachocline width30 of (0.039 ± 0.013) R and an equatorial
central radius rc = (0.693 ± 0.002) R, essentially placing
the transition beneath the convection zone. As noted previously by Antia et al. (1998) and Di Mauro and Dziembowski (1998), Charbonneau et al. found some indication
that rc increased towards the pole, with an equator-topole variation of ∆rc = (0.024 ± 0.004) R, in the sense
that the tachocline is prolate.
Although the overall features of rotation, as presented
above, have been found using several different data sets
and analysis methods, it should be mentioned that there
are problems at the level of finer details, particularly at
higher latitudes. These have become apparent in comparisons between results based on data from the GONG and
SOI/MDI projects, in both cases analyzed with the procedures used by both projects (e.g., Howe et al., 2001a;
Schou et al., 2002). The origin of the differences in the inferred rotation rates can be traced back mainly to differences in the analysis procedures used to determine the oscillation frequencies from the spherical-harmonic-filtered
time series (cf. Section VI.B.2). Also, as illustrated by
the comparison of the SOLA and RLS results in Fig. 18,
different inversion methods may give different results at
high latitude. Clearly, the underlying causes for these
various differences, and how to correct for them, need to
be identified.
As discussed in Section IV.C, models of solar evolution
have suggested the possible existence in the present Sun
of a rapidly rotating core. Thus it is of obvious interest to infer the properties of rotation close to the solar
center. Unfortunately, this is extremely difficult and the
results obtained so far are somewhat contradictory. Only
for modes of the lowest degrees do the kernels extend into
the core and even for these the contribution from the core
to the rotational splitting is small.31 In addition, the observational determination of the splitting is difficult at
low degree: here only a few values of m are available, the
total splitting may be comparable to the natural widths
of the peaks in the oscillation power spectra, and the
common procedures for frequency determination may introduce a systematic bias (Appourchaux et al., 2000b).
A review of the problems in determining the core rotation, and of the results, was given by Eff-Darwich and
Korzennik (1998). As a result of the small contribution
from the core to the splitting, even fairly modest differences in the observed splittings of low-degree modes can

give disparate results for the core rotation. Indeed, recent
published values range from somewhat higher than the
surface rotation rate (e.g., Gizon et al., 1997; Corbard
et al., 1998b), over rates consistent with the bulk of the
envelope (e.g., Lazrek et al., 1996) to rotation substantially below the surface rate (e.g., Elsworth et al., 1995b;
Tomczyk, Schou, and Thompson, 1995). Charbonneau
et al. (1998) showed, based on LOWL data, that a core
of radius 0.1R could rotate at no more than twice the
surface rate. Chaplin et al. (1999b) attempted to obtain
averages of rotation localized to the core, from a combination of BiSON and LOWL splittings. The results were
consistent with constant rotation of the radiative interior, although with a possible suggestion of a down-turn
in the core; analysis of the averaging kernels showed that
constraining the measure of rotation to the inner 20 %
of the solar radius was only possible at the expense of
very substantial errors in the inferred rotation rate. Results consistent with uniform rotation of the deep interior
were also obtained by Chaplin et al. (2001a) who made
a careful simulation of possible systematic errors in the
determination of the low-degree frequency splittings.
IX. THE CHANGING, ASPHERICAL SUN

The Sun is not a static object. The slow evolutionary
changes are likely too small to be detectable within a human lifetime; however, the changes associated with the
22-year solar magnetic cycle (cf. Section IV.D) may be
expected to influence the structure and dynamics of the
solar interior with measurable consequences for the oscillation frequencies. One may hope that this can provide
information about the inner workings of the magnetic cycle, including the possible dynamo mechanisms responsible for it. In particular, dynamo action just below the
convection zone might produce organized magnetic fields
of sufficient strength to be detectable in the oscillation
frequencies.
The first evidence for frequency changes was obtained
by Woodard and Noyes (1985) who found an average
decrease in frequencies of low-degree modes of around
0.42 µHz from 1980 (close to solar maximum) to 1984
(near solar minimum). More extensive data by Libbrecht
and Woodard (1990, 1991), covering a substantial range
in frequency and degree, confirmed the general trend and
provided information about the dependence of the frequency change on mode parameters. It was found that
the change largely scaled as the inverse mode inertia,
much as do the effects of near-surface errors (cf. Section V.B). From 1986 to 1989 (i.e., essentially from minimum to close to maximum) the frequencies increased by
up to around 0.8 µHz; the change varied strongly with
frequency, from being negligible below 1.5 mHz to a maximum at 4 mHz. On this basis it was concluded that the

30
The width is defined as the parameter w in a representation of the transition of the form 0.5{1 + erf[2(r − rc )/w]},
where rc is the central location of the transition.
31
The problem is more severe than for structure inversion,
which also includes modes of degree l = 0; these obviously
have no rotational splitting. Furthermore, the kernels for rotation are suppressed by geometrical effects for small r.

35

dominant source of the frequency variation was localized
very close to the solar surface. This was confirmed in a
careful comparison of results from several different data
sets by Chaplin et al. (2001b). Furthermore, the frequency variations have been shown to be closely correlated with surface activity, even on time scales of months
(e.g., Woodard et al., 1991; Bachmann and Brown, 1993;
Rhodes et al., 1993; Elsworth et al., 1994; Chaplin et al.,
2001c).
A closely related issue are the effects of departures
from spherical symmetry. The resulting variations in
wave speed with latitude make a contribution to the frequency splitting in azimuthal order that is independent
of the sign of m; thus, in terms of the expansion given
in Eq. (69) these effects give rise to even a coefficients.32
Early measurements of these coefficients were reported
by Duvall et al. (1986) and Brown and Morrow (1987).
These coefficients, and their variation during the solar
cycle, behaved in a manner corresponding to the timevarying latitude dependence of the solar surface temperature and magnetic field (e.g., Kuhn, 1988; Goode and
Kuhn, 1990; Woodard and Libbrecht, 1993). Extensive
data during the rising phase of the present solar cycle
have been obtained from the GONG and SOI/MDI experiments, greatly strengthening the evidence for a close
correlation between the variations in the oscillation frequencies and the surface magnetic field (Dziembowski et
al., 1998, 2000; Howe et al., 1999). Antia et al. (2001)
considered data covering the period 1995–2000 from both
GONG and SOI/MDI, and extending to a14 . They again
found a very close correlation between the variations in
the a coefficients and in the corresponding components of
a Legendre-polynomial expansion of the surface magnetic
flux; this strongly suggests that the behavior of the oscillation frequencies is directly related to the near-surface
magnetic field. Furthermore, from an inverse analysis of
the changes they confirmed the superficial nature of the
changes in the wave-propagation speed.
From these results it may appear that the measurements of the frequency changes and the even a coefficients
have so far added little to our knowledge about solar
variability. Nonetheless, it is still of considerable interest
to investigate the causes for these effects. Gough and
Thompson (1988) concluded that the asphericities causing the even a coefficients in the expansion of frequency
splittings were likely of magnetic origin. Goldreich et al.
(1991) carried out an analysis of the effects of changes
in the near-surface magnetic field and the entropy of the

convection zone and similarly concluded that the dominant cause of the frequency change with time was magnetic. A subsequent analysis by Balmforth et al. (1996)
confirmed that entropy perturbations alone were unlikely
to be able to account for the observed frequency changes.
The frequency changes for low-degree modes generally
follow the same behavior as seen at high degrees (e.g.,
Elsworth et al., 1994). However, closer inspection reveals striking differences: Jiménez-Reyes et al. (1998)
found that, when plotted against magnetic flux, the frequency changes exhibited hysteresis, with the frequency
at a given flux being larger during the rising phase of
the solar cycle than during the declining phase. MorenoInsertis and Solanki (2000) showed that this behavior
could be understood in terms of the variation with phase
of the solar cycle of the distribution of the magnetic field
over the solar surface, as could variations in the frequency
change with degree. This behavior is clearly closely related to the changes in the even a coefficients during the
solar cycle, discussed above.
According to Eq. (53) the f-mode frequencies are determined essentially by the solar surface radius. This has
been used to estimate corrections to the commonly used
value by comparing the observed frequencies to those of
solar models (Schou et al., 1997; Antia, 1998). Dziembowski et al. (1998) and Antia et al. (2000a) noted that
the inferred radius changed with time, reflecting possible
solar-cycle changes in the solar surface radius. However,
it was pointed out by Dziembowski et al. (2001) that,
as already noted by Gough (1993), Eq. (53) should be
corrected for the finite radial extent of the f-mode eigenfunctions; thus the inferred radius change may in fact
take place in subsurface layers, resulting from changes in
magnetic fields or temperature stratification, with little
effect on the photospheric radius Rph . Dziembowski et
al. (2001) concluded that the change in Rph associated
with the solar cycle is only a few kilometres, of uncertain
sign, and hence certainly too small to have a significant
effect on the solar irradiance.
Although the evidence discussed so far points to a superficial nature of the effects of solar activity on solar
structure and oscillation frequencies, it is possible that
magnetic fields, or other aspherical perturbations, sufficiently strong to have an observable effect may exist
deeper within the Sun. Gough et al. (1996b) carried
out inversion of even a coefficients to search for radial
variations of the asphericity, concluding that it was confined to a shallow layer close to the surface. Antia et al.
(2000b) found evidence for an aspherical perturbation
at r ≃ 0.96R; by analyzing frequencies of modes penetrating beyond the base of the convection zone they also
placed an upper limit of around 30 Tesla on a possible
toroidal magnetic field located in this region. Evidence
for asphericity in the wave speed over a range of depths
in the convection zone was also found by Dziembowski

32

Quadratic effects of rotation (cf. Section V.E) also contribute to the even a coefficients; these contributions can be
calculated from the helioseismically inferred angular velocity;
see, for example, Dziembowski et al. (1998) and Antia et al.
(2000b).

36

ments over time, at each latitude and radial location,
has been subtracted, and the resulting residuals are displayed. The bands of faster rotation converging towards
the equator are evident. Remarkably, these can be followed below the surface to a depth of at least 8 % of the
solar radius; on the solar surface, they correspond closely
to the variations first seen by Howard and LaBonte. Thus
these variations involve a substantial fraction of the solar
convection zone. Similar results were obtained by Antia and Basu (2000, 2001). Vorontsov et al. (2002) analyzed SOI/MDI data using an adaptive regularization
technique and found indications that the flows involve
the entire convection zone. The physical origin of these
zonal flows is as yet not clear; it is interesting, however,
that Covas et al. (2000) found a similar spatial and temporal behavior of rotation in a mean-field dynamo model
of the solar magnetic variations.
Birch and Kosovichev (1998) and Schou et al. (1998)
found that the near-polar rotation was substantially
slower than expected from the directly observed surface
rotation rate (cf. Eq. 1) or from a simple extrapolation
from results at lower latitude. Similarly, Fig. 19 shows
substantial variations at higher latitudes, not obviously
related to the zonal flows at lower latitude. These variations can be followed to latitudes of at least 80◦ (Schou,
1999; Antia and Basu, 2001).

et al. (2000). Finally, from analysis of SOI/MDI data
Antia et al. (2001) found a significant peak, at r = 0.92R
and a latitude of 60◦ , in the time-averaged asphericity,
with a similar though weaker signal in GONG data. The
physical nature of these perturbations is so far unknown;
in particular, as shown by Zweibel and Gough (1995) it
is very difficult to distinguish between direct magnetic
effects and effects of variations in the sound speed.

FIG. 19. The evolution with time in the zonal flows, inferred
from SOLA inversions of data from SOI/MDI, after subtraction of the time-averaged rotation rate. The results are presented as a function of time and latitude, the grey scale at the
right giving the scale in nHz. The top panel is at a radius of
0.99R and the bottom panel is at 0.92R. Note that the plot
has been symmetrized around the equator, since global rotational inversion only senses the symmetrical component of
the rotation rate (cf. Section V.E). The white vertical stripes
correspond to periods where the SOHO spacecraft was temporarily non-functional. (Adapted from Howe et al., 2001b.)

0.72R

0.63R

4
2
0
-2
-4

0o

δΩ/2π (nHz)

4
2
0
-2
-4
8

30o

4
0

Solar activity also affects the dynamics of the solar convection zone. In Doppler observations of the solar surface Howard and LaBonte (1980) found bands of slightly
faster and slower rotation, which they called torsional
oscillations, shifting towards lower latitudes as the solar cycle progressed (for more recent results, see Ulrich,
1998, 2001). Kosovichev and Schou (1997) and Schou
et al. (1998) found similar variations with latitude in the
rotation rate inferred from helioseismic inversion, extending over perhaps 5 % of the solar radius. By analyzing
f-mode frequency splittings, Schou (1999) showed that
these bands shifted towards the equator with time, in a
manner very similar to the surface torsional oscillations.
Howe et al. (2000a, 2001b) studied the depth variation
and time evolution of these so-called zonal flows, as illustrated in Fig. 19. Here data from SOI/MDI have been
analyzed in 72-day segments, to infer the rotation rate
during each of these periods; an average over all seg-

-4

60o

-8
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Date (years)

FIG. 20. Deviation from the mean rotation rate inferred from
inversions at various locations near the base of the convection
zone, as a function of time. Open circles represent results
from the GONG network, and filled triangles are from the
SOI/MDI experiment. (From Howe et al., 2001b.)

Variations in the rotation rate at even greater depth
were detected by Howe et al. (2000b; see also Howe et al.,
2001b). These are illustrated in Fig. 20, which again is
based on subtracting time-averaged rotation rates from
the results for time segments. The most striking variation, seen both in data from GONG and SOI/MDI, is an
oscillation with a period of around 1.3 y in the equato-

37

rial region at the base of the convection zone.33 Careful
analyses have shown that this cannot simply be an effect
of systematic errors in the observations with an annual
period.34 At the depth of 0.63R, well below the convection zone, there are indications of an oscillation with
the same period but the opposite phase. Significant variations are also found at higher latitude, although with
less regular periodicities. Possible physical mechanisms
that may be responsible for this behavior were discussed
by Thompson (2001); a particularly interesting model
results from dynamo calculations which exhibit periodhalving bifurcations (Covas et al., 2001).

layers down to the depth of penetration, determined by
the lower turning point (cf. Eq. 35) of the waves that
are observed. By analyzing the properties of such local waves, it is possible to infer local three-dimensional
structures and flows beneath the solar surface.
Early investigations of this nature considered the wave
field around sunspots. By carrying out a so-called Hankel transform of the waves in cylindrical coordinates,
centered on the spot, Braun, Duvall & LaBonte (1987)
demonstrated that wave energy was absorbed or scattered by the spot. This provided the potential for studying the subsurface structure of active regions. Brown
(1990) presented a technique for inverting such data to
obtain a map of active-region structure; he noted that,
unlike ‘classical’ helioseismology using oscillations frequencies, this is based on observations of amplitudes and
phases of the waves. A detailed review of the seismology
of active regions was given by Bogdan & Braun (1995).
Studies of local properties of the solar interior, known
as local helioseismology, are developing very rapidly, although they have not yet reached the level of maturity of
global helioseismology. A basic difficulty which has not
yet been fully solved is the treatment of the forward problem, i.e., the calculation of the wave field and the resulting observables for a given subsurface structure and flow.
(In contrast, in global helioseismology it is straightforward to compute oscillation frequencies for a solar model
with an assumed rotation law.) As a result, the inferences made through local analysis are somewhat difficult
to interpret, in terms of their resolution and the extent to
which they reflect the true properties of the solar interior,
although substantial progress has recently been made in
this area.

X. LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY

So far, I have considered global modes of solar oscillation, resulting from the interference of acoustic or
surface-gravity waves travelling through the Sun. The
frequencies of these modes reflect the properties, such as
structure and rotation, of that part of the Sun through
which travel the waves making up a given mode. By
suitably combining the frequencies of these modes, information about structure and rotation can be localized
to limited regions in radius and latitude, providing inferences about the variation of these properties with position within the Sun.
Powerful though they are, such analyses have obvious
limitations. The global modes extend over all longitudes;
thus analysis of their frequencies provide essentially no
information about longitude variation of solar properties; furthermore, as discussed in Section V.E, they depend only on that component of, e.g., rotation which
is symmetric around the equator. Also, the properties
of global modes have little sensitivity to meridional or
more complex flows, such as large-scale convective eddies, which may be present in the solar convection zone.
Further, although the modes are undoubtedly affected
by sunspots or other manifestations of strong localized
magnetic fields, these effects do not lend themselves to
detailed inferences of, say the three-dimensional subsurface structure of a sunspot.
However, it is possible to analyse the observations in
ways that provide more general information. The wave
field in a given region of the solar surface is affected by
the properties of that region, including the subsurface

Frequency = 3500 µHz

Frequency = 4000 µHz

FIG. 21. Ring diagrams obtained as cuts through tridimensional power spectra at the frequencies indicated; the
data used are SOI/MDI full-disc Dopplergrams. Each ring
corresponds to a value of the radial order n. (Adapted from
González Hernández et al. 1998a.)

33

Interestingly, evidence for variations with a similar period
has been detected in solar activity and the solar wind; e.g.,
Ichimoto et al. (1985).
34
In an independent analysis, Basu and Antia (2001) failed
to confirm these findings; although some of their results
showed variations reminiscent of those illustrated in Fig. 20,
the authors did not consider them to be significant.

A. Ring-diagram analysis

Possibly the first analysis of effects on oscillation frequencies of local perturbations was presented by Gough
and Toomre (1983). They pointed out that the frequencies would be changed by a local velocity field, through
38

2000; Schou and Bogart, 1998; Basu, Antia, and Tripathy, 1999). At higher activity, the situation appears to
be more complicated. Some recent results, from an extensive analysis of MDI data by Haber et al. (2002), are
illustrated in Fig. 22. In the lower panel, obtained near
solar minimum, there is a regular flow from the equator
towards the poles at all depths.35 In the upper panel,
however, obtained near solar maximum activity, the flows
in the Northern hemisphere are substantially more complicated, a countercell with an equator-ward flow having
developed at depth at higher latitudes.
The ring-diagram analysis also allows separate determination of the rotation rate in the northern and southern hemispheres. Haber et al. (2000, 2001) found zonal
flows converging towards the equator, similar to those
inferred from global helioseismic inversions (cf. Section IX), although with a substantial North-South asymmetry, as illustrated in Fig. 23. When symmetrized
around the equator, these results were in reasonable
agreement with those obtained from global inversions,
however.

the advection of the wave pattern; furthermore, they established the frequency perturbation resulting from a local perturbation to the sound speed. This suggestion was
developed into a practical procedure by Hill (1988). He
considered the power spectrum, based on the oscillation
field over a restricted area of the solar surface, as a function of frequency ω and the components kx and ky of the
horizontal wave vector in the longitude and latitude directions. In the (ω, kx , ky ) space the results are ‘trumpetlike’ surfaces, obtained by rotating the ridges in Fig. 10
around the frequency axis. The analysis is carried out
by considering cuts through these surfaces at fixed frequency: the result is a set of rings, each corresponding
to a ridge in the l − ν diagram. (cf. Fig. 21). As shown
by Hill (1988) these rings are shifted by the underlying
horizontal flow field, the shift of a given ring being given
by an average of the velocity weighted by the relevant
radial eigenfunction. Similarly, variations in the subsurface sound speed cause a distortion of the rings. Thus,
by considering different rings and different frequencies, a
set of data is obtained from which the depth variation
of the flow or the sound speed can be inferred by means
of inversion techniques such as those described in Section VI.C. These results are then assumed to represent
horizontal averages over the region for which the ring
diagrams have been determined. By repeating this for
several regions on the solar surface, a map of the flow
and subsurface sound speed can be built up.

FIG. 23. Longitudinally averaged zonal flows, obtained from
ring-diagram analysis. The dashed curves show results at
a depth of 0.9 Mm, and the solid curves are at a depth of
7 Mm. The results in the lower panel were obtained in 1997,
at relatively low solar activity, whereas the upper panel is
from 2001, close to solar maximum activity. This should be
compared to the zonal flows obtained from global analysis (cf.
Fig. 19); note that in the latter figure only the component
symmetrical around the equator is obtained. (Adapted from
Haber et al., 2001.)

FIG. 22. Meridional flows in the solar convection zone, as
inferred from ring-diagram analysis, plotted against latitude
(abscissa) and depth beneath the solar surface (ordinate).
The length of the arrows indicate the speed, the scale being indicated at the lower left; grey regions mark southward
flow. The results in the lower panel were obtained in 1997, at
relatively low solar activity, whereas the upper panel is from
2001, close to solar maximum activity. (Adapted from Haber
et al., 2002.)

Hindman et al. (2001) used ring diagrams to determine what essentially corresponds to the mean multiplet
frequency, as a function of position on the solar disk,
and in this way obtained local frequency shifts associated with active regions; when averaged over the solar
disk and time, the results are not inconsistent with the

Detailed analyses have been carried out of the flows
in the solar convection zone by means of this technique.
Clear evidence has been found for meridional flows, which
tend to be poleward at periods of low solar activity (e.g.,
González Hernández et al., 1998b; Haber et al., 1998,

35

The slight North-South asymmetry may be due to a modest misalignment of the orientation of the solar polar axis
which was assumed in the analysis.

39

frequency changes observed for global modes over the solar cycle (cf. Section IX). This may provide insight into
the physical origins of these frequency changes. A related theoretical investigation of frequency shifts caused
by localized strong magnetic fields, such as are present
in active regions, was carried out by Cunha et al. (1998).

this approximation is questionable in the solar case, since
the wavelength in general is not small compared to the
scale of the features that are investigated. Birch and
Kosovichev (2000, 2001) studied the effects of wave-speed
perturbations in the first Born approximation to derive
travel-time sensitivity kernels, relating the wave-speed
perturbation to the change in the travel time, as a replacement for the ray approximation. Jensen et al. (2000)
proposed simple analytical approximations to such kernels and showed that they were in reasonable agreement
with sensitivity computations based on solutions to the
wave equation. These kernels were used for inversion to
infer wave-speed perturbations by Jensen et al. (2001),
who also determined averaging kernels reflecting the resolution properties of the inversion. Birch et al. (2001)
made a careful analysis of the accuracy of the Born and
ray approximations, by comparing them with direct calculations of the scattering of acoustic waves in a uniform
medium. Finally, Jensen and Pijpers (2002) derived sensitivity kernels for wave-speed perturbations and flow velocity in the Rytov approximation, and compared various
approximations to these kernels. It is very encouraging
that the theoretical basis for the time-distance technique
is getting more solidly established through these analyses; information transfer from similar work in geophysics
has been very fruitful in this regard.
Time-distance analyses have been used to investigate
the near-surface flow fields associated with supergranular convection (e.g., Kosovichev, 1996b). In an interesting analysis based on f modes, Duvall and Gizon (2000)
evaluated the vertical vorticity associated with the flow
and showed that this was in agreement with theoretical
expectations for convection in a rotating system. Giles et
al. (1997) determined properties of the meridional flows
in the solar convection zone, from the equator towards
the poles, also seen with the ring-diagram analyses (cf.
Fig. 22). Inferences of meridional flows over an an extended range of depths within the convection zone were
reported by Duvall and Kosovichev (2001); interestingly,
no evidence was found for a return flow. Variations with
time in the meridional flow, inferred from time-distance
analysis, were discussed by Chou and Dai (2001). As in
the ring-diagram results, the flow showed increasing complexity with increasing solar activity; however, as Chou
and Dai did not carry out an inversion in the radial direction, a more detailed comparison of the results is not
possible.
Investigations have also been made of wave-speed perturbations associated with emerging active regions (e.g.,
Kosovichev et al., 2000; Jensen et al., 2001). An example is shown in Fig. 24. It is evident that the emerging
magnetic field is associated with a complex structure of
generally increased wave speed below the solar surface.
Zhao et al. (2001) recently inferred the velocity field beneath a large sunspot; they found a strong mass flow

B. Time-distance analysis and helioseismic holography

In geoseismology the most commonly used procedure
is to measure the travel time for waves between a known
source and a detector. The sources range from distant
earthquakes, in investigations of the global structure of
the Earth, to vibrators in measurements of local subsurface structures. The travel time provides an integral
of the wave speed along the path of the wave; many
such travel times can be combined to produce a coherent model of the region under study. In this way it has
been possible to obtain a three-dimensional model of the
interior of the Earth (e.g., Dziewonski and Woodhouse,
1987).
In the solar case there are no similarly sharply defined sources of the waves: as discussed in Section V.F,
the waves are continuously excited by the random effects
of the near-surface convection. Nevertheless, it was argued by Duvall et al. (1993b) that a similar signal could
be obtained from a suitable correlation analysis of the
wave field observed at the solar surface; the time delay
maximizing the correlation between two points provides
a measure of the travel time along the ray connecting
these two points. The technique was developed further
by D’Silva (1996) and D’Silva et al. (1996). Within the
approximation of geometrical acoustics the travel time
along the ray Γi can be written as
Z
ds
,
(83)
τi (t) =
c
(r,
t)
+
v(r, t) · n
Γi w
where s is distance along the ray, r is the spatial coordinate, cw is the local wave speed, v is the local flow
velocity and n is a unit vector along the ray; the appearance of time t indicates that both the wave speed and flow
velocity may depend on time. The wave speed is predominantly given by the sound speed but may be perturbed
by magnetic fields in active regions. Given measurements
along a sufficient number of rays, these relations may be
inverted to infer cw (r, t) and v(r, t) (Kosovichev, 1996b).
Reviews of time-distance techniques were given by Kosovichev and Duvall (1997), and Kosovichev et al. (2000,
2001).
In practice, the correlation analysis is carried out between regions of the solar surface, typically a small central area and a surrounding ring or parts of a ring. Also,
Eq. (83) assumes that the waves can be treated in the
ray approximation. It was noted by Bogdan (1997) that
40

the presence of acoustic absorbers or scatterers in the
subsurface layers. The methods have predominantly been
used to investigate the subsurface structure and acoustic properties of active regions (e.g., Chen et al., 1998;
Braun et al., 1998; Lindsey and Braun, 1998; Braun and
Lindsey, 2000). A tutorial review of helioseismic holography was given by Lindsey and Braun (2000a), while
Chou (2000) reviewed the work done on acoustic imaging. A technique for inversion of the holographic data
was presented by Skartlien (2002).

across the spot at depth of 9–12 Mm, indicating that the
magnetic field responsible for the spot has a rather loose
structure at these depths.
200

a)

150

100

50

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Depth [Mm]

0
10

b)

20
30
40

Depth [Mm]

0
10

c)

20
30
40
180

200

220

240

260

280

300

320

340

Horizontal distance [Mm]

FIG. 24. Panel (a) shows an MDI magnetogram of an emerging active region; distances are in Mm, and the black and
white regions indicate magnetic fields of opposite polarity,
over a range between −0.1 and 0.1 Tesla. Panels (b) and
(c) show wave-speed perturbations below the surface, at the
cross section marked by ⊢ and ⊣ in panel (a); the grey
scale ranges from perturbations of −0.2 km s−1 (white) to
0.5 km s−1 (black). Panel (c) was obtained at the same time
as the magnetogram in panel (a), while panel (b) was taken
16 hours earlier. (Adapted from Jensen et al., 2001.)

FIG. 25. Schematic illustration of the principle in imaging
active regions on the far side of the Sun. The figure shows the
propagation of waves in a cross section of the Sun, starting
from a focal point in an active region on the far side and
observed in the pupil on the near side. See text for details.
(Adapted from Lindsey and Braun, 2000b.)

The ability of the holographic analysis to detect active regions on the far side of the Sun was convincingly
demonstrated by Lindsey and Braun (2000b), through
analysis of data from SOI/MDI. The principle is illustrated schematically in Fig. 25. Waves emerging from
the far side of the Sun can be measured on the near side,
in the region denoted ‘pupil’, after one or more reflections at the solar surface; through appropriate analysis
of the measured wave field it is possible to focus on specific regions on the far side. Relative to the neighboring
quiet photosphere waves from the active region suffer a
phase shift which can be detected. This is illustrated in
Fig. 26 where the phase shift (expressed as a change in
travel time) determined on the far side is compared to a
magnetogram of the same region after it has moved to the
near side of the Sun as a result of solar rotation. There is
clearly a striking agreement between the features in the
acoustic and direct image. Further developments of this
technique has allowed imaging of the entire far side of
the Sun, extending also to the region near the solar limb

A technique closely related to time-distance helioseismology is known as helioseismic holography. It goes back
to a proposal by Roddier (1975) to use holographic methods to visualize acoustic sources below the solar surface,
followed by a suggestion by Lindsey and Braun (1990)
that it might be possible to form an acoustic image of
sunspots on the back of the Sun.36 However, the first
practical application of the technique seems to have been
by Lindsey and Braun (1997) and the parallel development of the so-called technique of acoustic imaging by
Chang et al. (1997). In these techniques, the acoustic
wave field on the solar surface is combined coherently,
taking into account the phase information, to reconstruct

36
Peri and Libbrecht (1991) searched for, but failed to find,
a deficit of acoustic power at the antipodes of far-side active
regions.

41

and over the poles (Braun and Lindsey 2001).
I finally mention that Woodard (2002) has developed
a new analysis method where the intermediate steps between data and inferences are to some extent bypassed,
hence approaching the ideal case presented in the introduction to Section VI.B. Specifically, he obtained a
relation between inhomogeneity-induced correlations in
the observed wave field and the underlying supergranular flow. Results of analysis of data from the MDI instrument showed a very promising correlation with the
directly measured surface flow field. A detailed comparison of this technique with other techniques of local helioseismology, evaluating its advantages and possible disadvantages, still remains to be carried out, however.

These are remarkable achievements, in providing observational information about the internal properties of
a star. However, an important goal is now to understand the results in physical terms, and evaluate their
broader consequences for the modeling of stellar structure and evolution, as well as their implications for our
understanding of physics of matter in stars.
Investigations of the thermodynamic properties in the
convection zone have shown that even the present complex descriptions are inadequate, at the level of precision
reached by the helioseismic inferences; this demonstrates
the possibility of using the Sun as a laboratory for the
study of the equation of state of partially ionized matter,
in very great detail. Although the effects are subtle in the
solar case, they could have substantial importance under
other astrophysical circumstances, such as in lower-mass
stars or giant planets where the interactions between the
constituents of the plasma are much stronger.
The successes in overall solar modeling should not overshadow the failures: the differences between the inferred
solar sound speed and the predictions of the models are
far larger than the observational uncertainty. A particularly striking feature is the localized region just below the
convection zone where the solar sound speed is substantially higher than that of the models. This is a region
where the models predict a strong gradient in the hydrogen abundance, as a result of settling of helium from
the convection zone towards the interior. It also approximately coincides with the tachocline, i.e., the transition
between the latitudinally varying rotation in the convection zone and the almost uniform rotation in the radiative interior. It was suggested by Gough and McIntyre
(1998) that the uniform rotation of the interior is maintained by a weak magnetic field, the tachocline being established as a boundary layer; within this region circulation is established which leads to mixing.37 Mixing would
also result from the strongly anisotropic turbulence originally suggested by Spiegel and Zahn (1992) to explain
the tachocline. In either case, mixing of the region just
beneath the convection zone would tend to reduce the
composition gradients, locally increasing the hydrogen
abundance and hence the sound speed, as required by
the helioseismic results (Brun et al., 1999; Elliott and
Gough, 1999). Such smoothing of the gradient was also
suggested by the inversions, discussed in Section VII.B,
for the hydrogen abundance.
Independent evidence for mixing beneath the convection zone comes from the reduction in the solar photospheric lithium abundance, relative to the primordial
value (cf. Section III). Lithium is destroyed by nuclear

FIG. 26. The leftmost two panels show travel-time perturbations ∆t, in the vicinity of an active region on the far side of
the Sun. The right-hand panel shows a magnetogram of the
same region 10 days later, after the region has become visible
on the near side. The rule indicates angular distance on the
solar surface. (Adapted from Lindsey and Braun, 2000b.)

XI. THE HELIOSEISMIC SUN

It seems unlikely that even the most optimistic predictions in the early phases of helioseismology, around 1975,
could have foreseen the extent to which the solar interior
can now be probed. Inferences of solar structure have
shown that standard calculations of solar models reproduce the actual structure to a precision better than 0.5 %
in sound speed. This is a remarkable demonstration of
the ability of physics, including our current understanding of the microscopic properties of matter under stellar
conditions, to predict properties of such a relatively complex object as the Sun. It also provides strong evidence
that the discrepancy between the predicted and measured
capture rates of neutrinos results from the properties of
the neutrinos, rather than from errors in the modeling
of the solar interior. Indeed, the strong constraints on
solar structure from helioseismology provide a basis for
using the solar core as a well-calibrated neutrino source
for the study of neutrino physics. The solar rotation rate
has been determined in much of the solar interior, revealing striking variations with position, and changes in
time. Further, information is emerging about the flows
in the solar convection zone and the subsurface structure
of magnetically active regions.

37
Detailed numerical modeling of this mechanism has been
started by Garaud (2002).

42

reactions at temperatures above 2.5×106 K, substantially
higher than the temperature at the base of the convection
zone. In fact, models with mixing have been computed
which match the lithium abundance, suppressing also the
peak in the sound-speed difference just below the convection zone (e.g., Richard et al., 1996; Chaboyer, 1998;
Brun et al., 1999). On the other hand, the fact that
the photospheric beryllium abundance is close to the primordial value indicates that significant mixing does not
extend to temperatures as high as 3.5×106 K where beryllium is destroyed.
The inferences of solar internal rotation show that the
rotation rate is almost constant in the radiative interior:
unlike simple models of the Sun’s rotational evolution
from an assumed state of rapid initial rotation, there is
no indication of a rapidly rotating core. An important
consequence is that the solar oblateness, which can be
calculated precisely from the inferred rotation rate, has
no significant effects on tests, based on planetary motion,
of Einstein’s theory of general relativity (e.g., Pijpers,
1998; Roxburgh, 2001). The nearly uniform rotation of
the radiative interior indicates the presence of efficient
transport of angular momentum, coupling the radiative
interior to the convection zone, from which angularmomentum loss has taken place through the solar wind.
It was proposed by Kumar and Quataert (1997) and
Talon and Zahn (1998) that angular-momentum transport might take place by means of gravity waves generated at the base of the solar convection zone. However, Gough and McIntyre (1998), with reference to analogous phenomena in the Earth’s atmosphere, argued that
gravity waves would be unlikely to have the required effect; they identified magnetic effects as the only plausible
transport mechanism, a weak primordial field being sufficient to ensure the required coupling.
The variation of the rotation rate in the convection zone, reflected also in the latitude dependence observed on the solar surface, is presumably maintained by
angular-momentum redistribution within the convection
zone, through interaction between rotation, convection
and possibly other flows. The observed variation is inconsistent with relatively simple models which tend to
predict a rotation rate depending on the distance to the
rotation axis (cf. Section IV.C). It was pointed out by
Gough (1976) that the interaction between rotation and
small-scale convection might lead to an anisotropic turbulent viscosity which could affect angular-momentum
transport; an estimate of the anisotropic Reynolds stress
tensor was made on the basis of three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations by Pulkkinen et al. (1993). Pidatella et al. (1986) used simple models of this nature to
interpret early helioseismic inferences of rotation in the
convection zone. Recently, the numerical resolution in
full hydrodynamical simulations of the solar convection
zone has become sufficient to capture at least some as-

pects of the smaller-scale turbulence (e.g., Miesch, 2000;
Miesch et al., 2000; Brun and Toomre, 2002); the results
of these simulations show an encouraging similarity to
the helioseismically inferred rotation profile.
It is likely that interaction between convection and rotation is responsible for the formation of the large-scale
solar magnetic field and its 22-year variation in the solar magnetic cycle, through some kind of dynamo mechanism. Dynamo models have in fact been constructed
which are based on the helioseismically inferred rotation
rate (e.g., Parker, 1993; Charbonneau and MacGregor,
1997).
Analyses of data during the period leading to the
present maximum in solar activity have shown striking
variations in solar rotation. Zonal flows converging towards the solar equator, previously detected in surface
observations, have been shown to extend over a substantial fraction of the convection zone. These bands
of somewhat faster and slower rotation appear to be related to the equator-ward drift of locations of sunspots
as the solar cycle progresses (e.g., Howard and LaBonte,
1980; Snodgrass, 1987; Ulrich, 1998, 2001); however, the
physical connection is as yet not understood. Even more
surprising has been the detection of oscillations with a
period of 1.3 y in the rotation rate near and below the
base of the convection zone; one may hope that they can
provide additional information about conditions in this
region and possibly about the mechanism of the solar dynamo. It is evident that such temporal variations provide
strong arguments for further detailed observations of solar oscillations, ideally through at least one full 22-year
magnetic cycle.
Further information about the detailed structure and
dynamics of the convection zone has been obtained from
local helioseismology. Large-scale convective flow patterns have been detected, as well as meridional flows
with complex structure that appears to depend on the
level of magnetic activity. This may lead to a detailed
understanding of the mechanisms controlling convection
and rotation, including the angular-momentum transport, when the observations are combined with the increasingly realistic modeling of the dynamics of the solar
convection zone. Also, detailed information is becoming
available about the subsurface structure and time evolution of active regions, which will likely lead to a better
understanding of the processes underlying their formation. Particularly interesting is the detection of active
regions on the far side of the Sun; by giving advance
warning before they reach the near side 1 – 2 weeks later
and hence have the potential to unleash eruptions in the
direction of the Earth, such observations may be helpful
in reducing the risk of harmful effects from such eruptions.
The causes of the solar oscillations are not central to
the use of the frequencies for helioseismic investigations,

43

In most cases, the oscillations are caused by intrinsic
driving resulting from various radiative or perhaps convective mechanisms. Although modes may be unstable
in a substantial range of frequencies, the modes observed
are typically only a relatively small subset of the unstable
modes, and the selection of modes which reaches observable amplitudes is complex and poorly understood. As a
result, it is difficult to identify the observed frequencies
with specific modes, characterized by their degree, radial
and azimuthal order; this has severely limited the possibilities for using the modes for investigating the stellar
interiors.
In contrast, oscillations excited in a manner similar to
what is observed in the Sun are expected to show a broad
spectrum of observable modes, most modes in this range
being present since no subtle selections are at work in
the determination of the mode amplitudes. This makes
solar-like oscillations very attractive for asteroseismology.
Furthermore, the relation between stellar structure and
the oscillation frequencies is relatively well understood.
In the foreseeable future stellar observations will be restricted to disk-averaged data, and hence to low-degree
modes;40 however, as discussed in Section V.C.3 these
are precisely the modes that give information about the
properties of stellar cores.
On the basis of our understanding of the source of the
solar oscillations (see Section XI), one may expect similar
oscillations in other stars with outer convection zones, although the predictions of their amplitudes are still somewhat uncertain (e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard and Frandsen, 1983; Houdek et al., 1999). However, in any case
the expected amplitudes in main-sequence stars is extremely low, as is also observed in the solar case: the
predicted velocity amplitudes are typically below 1 m s−1
and the relative luminosity amplitudes are below around
10 parts per million, severely stretching the capabilities of
ground-based observations faced with instrumental problems and fluctuations in the Earth’s atmosphere.41 Thus
it is hardly surprising that the observational results until recently have been at best tentative. An extensive
co-ordinated campaign with most of the World’s then

although the processes responsible for the excitation and
damping undoubtedly contribute to the frequency shifts,
suppressed in inverse analyses, which are induced by the
superficial layers of the Sun. The statistical properties
of the observed modes seem largely to be consistent with
stochastic excitation of damped oscillations, as discussed
in Section V.F (e.g., Chaplin et al., 1997; Chang and
Gough, 1998). Furthermore, Stein and Nordlund (1998b,
2001) showed that hydrodynamical simulations of solar
near-surface convection predicted the excitation of oscillations, with an energy input approximately consistent
with the observations; a detailed comparison by Georgobiani et al. (2000) between observations and hydrodynamical simulations of solar oscillations also showed
overall agreement, including indications of asymmetry.
On this basis, we can be reasonably confident that we
understand the overall aspects of the excitation of the
solar modes; thus it may be possible to use the observed
properties of the oscillations, including the statistics of
the amplitudes, to obtain information about convection
beneath the solar surface.
XII. PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Although impressive advances have been made on the
helioseismic study of the solar interior, this provides information about only an individual, relatively simple
star. Complete testing of the theory of stellar structure
and evolution would require studies of the broad range of
stellar types, spanning very different physical properties
and processes, that are observed. These include effects,
such as rapid rotation or convective cores, that cannot be
investigated in the solar case. Fortunately, it has been
found that stars of very different types, covering most
stellar masses and evolutionary states, show pulsations;
often, these stars are multi-mode pulsators and hence in
principle offer relatively detailed information about their
interiors. For example, such stars include the γ Doradus
and δ Scuti stars, the slowly pulsating B stars and the β
Cephei stars, which span the main sequence from masses
of 1.5 to more than 10 solar masses, and various classes of
white dwarfs.38 Thus there would appear to be an excellent potential for asteroseismology,39 probing the stellar
interiors on the basis of the observed frequencies.

40
However, a space-based interferometric mission has been
considered which would allow resolution of modes on distant
stars with degrees as high as 50 (e.g., Carpenter and Schrijver,
2000). This would, for example, allow some resolution of the
structure and rotation near the base of the convection zone
in a star similar to the Sun.
41
On the other hand, quite substantial amplitudes are predicted for red-giant stars. In fact, Christensen-Dalsgaard et
al. (2001) found evidence, based on observations by the American Association of Variable Star Observers, that semi-regular
variability in red giants might be caused by the same stochastic mechanism that is responsible for the solar oscillations.

38

For extensive discussions of general stellar pulsations, see,
for example, Unno et al. (1989), as well as the proceedings
edited by Breger and Montgomery (2000) and Aerts et al.
(2002).
39
This terminology has given rise to some discussion. Motivated by Trimble (1995) who questioned the appropriateness
of the term, Gough (1996b) gave what in my view is its definitive etymological justification.

44

largest telescopes (Gilliland et al., 1993) failed to find
oscillations in stars in the open cluster M67, in some
cases with upper limits below the theoretical predictions.
Promising results were obtained by Brown et al. (1991)
and Martić et al. (1999) for Procyon, again with amplitudes somewhat below predictions. Detailed results for
the sub-giant η Bootis were obtained by Kjeldsen et al.
(1995); interestingly, modeling by Christensen-Dalsgaard
et al. (1995) and Guenther and Demarque (1996) showed
that there might be evidence for g-mode-like behavior in
the observed frequencies. However, it must be noted that
the observations were questioned by Brown et al. (1997).

satellite is being developed, with the MONS project (for
Measuring Oscillations in Nearby Stars; ChristensenDalsgaard 2002), with launch planned for 2005; this will
be in an orbit that allows access to stars in essentially
the entire sky. Finally, the Eddington mission (Favata,
2002) currently has the status as reserve mission in the
programme of the European Space Agency; it will carry
out precise measurements of oscillations of a large number of stars of a variety of types.
Data for distant stars will obviously never be as detailed as those that have been obtained for the Sun; however, there is no doubt that asteroseismic investigations
of a broad range of stars, with very different properties,
will contribute greatly to our understanding of stellar
structure and evolution over the coming decades.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am very grateful to many colleagues, too numerous
to list, for discussions and collaborations within the field
of helioseismology. I thank S. Basu, F. Bouchy, D. C.
Braun, D. A. Haber, R. Howe, J. M. Jensen, C. Lindsey and J. Schou for assistance with figures. The work
reported here was supported in part by the Danish National Research Foundation through the establishment of
the Theoretical Astrophysics Center. The National Center for Atmospheric Research is sponsored by the National Science Foundation.

FIG. 27. Power spectrum of oscillations of α Cen A, from
radial-velocity observations with the CORALIE fiber-fed
echelle spectrograph on the 1.2 m Swiss telescope at the
La Silla site of the European Southern Observatory. (From
Bouchy and Carrier, 2001.)

In the last few years the observational situation has
undergone a dramatic improvement. Interesting results
have been obtained from photometric observations with
the star tracker on the otherwise failed WIRE satellite
(e.g., Buzasi et al., 2000; Schou and Buzasi, 2001). Furthermore, techniques have been developed for very stable radial-velocity measurements in connection with the
search for extra-solar planets. This has resulted in the
detection of evidence for solar-like oscillations in the star
β Hydri (Bedding et al., 2001); also, as shown in Fig. 27,
a very clear detection has been made in the ‘solar twin’
α Centauri A (Bouchy and Carrier, 2001).
Further developments are expected of ground-based
observing facilities, including the HARPS spectrograph
(Queloz et al., 2001) to be installed on the 3.6 m telescope
of the European Southern Observatory at La Silla. A major breakthrough of asteroseismology of solar-like stars
will result from observations from space. The Canadian
MOST satellite (for Microvariability and Oscillations
of STars; Matthews 1998) will be launched late in
2002. The French COROT satellite (for COnvection,
ROtation and planetary Transits; Baglin et al. 1998,
2002) is scheduled for launch in 2004, and will obtain
very extended time series, with correspondingly high frequency resolution, for a handful of stars. Two other
projects are under development. The Danish Rømer

REFERENCES
Abdurashitov, J. N., T. J. Bowles, M. L. Cherry, et al., 1999,
“Measurement of the solar neutrino capture rate by SAGE
and implications for neutrino oscillations in vacuum,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 83, 4686–4689.
Abrams, D., and P. Kumar, 1996, “Asymmetries of solar pmode line profiles,” Astrophys. J. 472, 882–890.
Adelberger, E. G., S. M. Austin, J. N. Bahcall, et al., 1998,
“Solar fusion cross sections,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1265–
1291.
Aerts, C., T. R. Bedding, and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard,
(eds), 2002, Proc. IAU Colloq. 185: Radial and nonradial
pulsations as probes of stellar physics, ASP Conf. Ser., vol.
259 (ASP, San Francisco), p. i–xxvii, 1–667.
Ahmad, Q. R., R. C. Allen, T. C. Andersen, et al., 2001,
“Measurement of the rate of νe + d → p + p + e− interactions
produced by 8 B solar neutrinos at the Sudbury Neutrino
Observatory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 071301–(1-6).
Allende Prieto, C., D. L. Lambert, and M. Asplund, 2001,
“The forbidden abundance of oxygen in the Sun,” Astrophys.
J. 556, L63–L66.
Anders, E., and N. Grevesse, 1989, “Abundances of the elements: meteoritic and solar,” Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
53, 197–214.

45

eto, and R. F. Stein, 2000a, “Line formation in solar granulation. I. Fe line shapes, shifts and asymmetries,” Astron.
Astrophys. 359, 729–742.
Auwers, A., 1891, “Der Sonnendurchmesser und der Venusdurchmesser nach den Beobachtungen an den Heliometern
der deutschen Venus-Expedition,” Astron. Nachr. 128, 361–
375.
Böhm-Vitense, E., 1958, “Über die Wasserstoffkonvektionszone in Sternen verschiedener Effektivtemperaturen und
Leuchtkräfte,” Z. Astrophys. 46, 108–143.
Bachmann, K. T., and T. M. Brown, 1993, “p-mode frequency
variation in relation to global solar activity,” Astrophys. J.
411, L45–L48.
Backus, G., and F. Gilbert, 1970, “Uniqueness in the inversion of inaccurate gross Earth data,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
London, Ser. A 266, 123–192.
Baglin, A. and the COROT team, 1998, “Asteroseismology
with the space mission COROT,” in Proc. IAU Symp. 185:
New eyes to see inside the Sun and stars, edited by F.L. Deubner, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and D. W. Kurtz
(Kluwer, Dordrecht) p. 301–308.
Baglin, A., M. Auvergne, P. Barge, J.-T. Buey, C. Catala, E.
Michel, W. Weiss, and the COROT Team, 2002, “COROT:
Asteroseismology and planet finding,” in Proc. 1st Eddington Workshop, ‘Stellar Structure and Habitable Planet Finding’, ESA SP-485, eds F. Favata, I. W. Roxburgh and D.
Galadi (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 17–24.
Bahcall, J. N., 1989, Neutrino astrophysics, (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England).
Bahcall, J. N., N. A. Bahcall, and G. Shaviv, 1968, “Present
status of the theoretical predictions for the 36 Cl solarneutrino experiment,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1209–1212.
Bahcall, J. N., N. A. Bahcall, and R. K. Ulrich, 1968, “Mixing
in the Sun and neutrino fluxes,” Astrophys. Lett. 2, 91–95.
Bahcall, J. N., L. S. Brown, A. Gruzinov, and R. F. Sawyer,
2002, “The Salpeter plasma correction for solar fusion reactions,” Astron. Astrophys. 383, 291–295.
Bahcall, J. N., and M. H. Pinsonneault, 1992, “Standard solar
models, with and without helium diffusion and the solar
neutrino problem,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 885–926.
Bahcall, J. N., and M. H. Pinsonneault (with an appendix
by G. J. Wasserburg), 1995, “Solar models with helium and
heavy-element diffusion,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 781–808.
Bahcall, J. N., M. H. Pinsonneault, and S. Basu, 2001, “Solar models: current epoch and time dependences, neutrinos,
and helioseismological properties,” Astrophys. J. 555, 990–
1012.
Bahcall, J. N., M. H. Pinsonneault, S. Basu, and J.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1997, “Are standard solar models
reliable?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 171–174.
Bahcall, J. N., P. I. Krastev, and A. Yu. Smirnov, 1998,
“Where do we stand with neutrino oscillations?” Phys. Rev.
D 59, 096016–(1-22).
Bahng, J., and M. Schwarzschild, 1963, “Hydrodynamic oscillations in the solar chromosphere,” Astrophys. J. 137,
901–913.
Balachandran, S. C., and R. A. Bell, 1998, “Shallow mixing in the solar photosphere inferred from revised beryllium
abundances,” Nature (London) 392, 791–793.

Anderson, E. R., T. L. Duvall, Jr., and S. M. Jefferies, 1990,
“Modeling of solar oscillation power spectra,” Astrophys. J.
364, 699–705.
Ando, H., and Y. Osaki, 1975, “Nonadiabatic nonradial oscillations: An application to the five-minute oscillation of the
sun,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 27, 581–603.
Angulo, C., M. Arnould, M. Rayet, et al., 1999, “A compilation of charged-particle induced thermonuclear reaction
rates,” Nucl. Phys. A 656, 3–183.
Antia, H. M., 1998, “Estimate of the solar radius from f-mode
frequencies,” Astron. Astrophys. 330, 336–340.
Antia, H. M., and S. Basu, 1994a, “Nonasymptotic helioseismic inversion for solar structure,” Astron. Astrophys. Suppl.
Ser. 107, 421–444.
Antia, H. M., and S. Basu, 1994b, “Measuring the helium
abundance in the solar envelope: the role of the equation of
state,” Astrophys. J. 426, 801–811.
Antia, H. M., and S. Basu, 2000, “Temporal variations of
the rotation rate in the solar interior,” Astrophys. J. 541,
442–448.
Antia, H. M., and S. Basu, 2001, “Temporal variations of the
solar rotation rate at high latitudes,” Astrophys. J. 559,
L67–L70.
Antia, H. M., S. Basu, and S. M. Chitre, 1998, “Solar internal
rotation rate and the latitudinal variation of the tachocline,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 298, 543–556.
Antia, H. M., S. Basu, F. Hill, R. Howe, R. W. Komm, and
J. Schou, 2001, “Solar-cycle variation of the sound-speed
asphericity from GONG and MDI data 1995–2000,” Mon.
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 327, 1029–1040.
Antia, H. M., S. Basu, J. Pintar, and B. Pohl, 2000a, “Solar
cycle variation in solar f-mode frequencies and radius,” Solar
Phys. 192, 459–468.
Antia, H. M., and S. M. Chitre, 1997, “Helioseismic models
and solar neutrino fluxes,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 289,
L1–L4.
Antia, H. M., and S. M. Chitre, 1998, “Determination of temperature and chemical composition profiles in the solar interior from seismic models,” Astron. Astrophys. 339, 239–251.
Antia, H. M., S. M. Chitre, and M. J. Thompson, 2000b, “The
Sun’s acoustic asphericity and magnetic fields in the solar
convection zone,” Astron. Astrophys. 360, 335–344.
Appourchaux, T., H.-Y. Chang, D. O. Gough, and T. Sekii,
2000b, “On measuring low-degree p-mode frequency splitting with full-disc integrated data,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 319, 365–376.
Appourchaux, T., C. Fröhlich, B. Andersen, et al., 2000a,
“Observational upper limits to low-degree solar g-modes,”
Astrophys. J. 538, 401–414.
Appourchaux, T., L. Gizon, and M.-C. Rabello-Soares, 1998,
“The art of fitting p-mode spectra. I. Maximum likelihood
estimation,” Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 132, 107–119.
Appourchaux, T., M.-C. Rabello-Soares, and L. Gizon, 1998,
“The art of fitting p-mode spectra. II. Leakage and noise
covariance matrices,” Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 132,
121–132.
Asplund, M., Å. Nordlund, R. Trampedach, and R. F. Stein,
2000b, “Line formation in solar granulation. II. The photospheric Fe abundance,” Astron. Astrophys. 359, 743–754.
Asplund, M., Å. Nordlund, R. Trampedach, C. Allende Pri-

46

Bedding, T. R., R. P. Butler, H. Kjeldsen, I. K. Baldry, S. J.
O’Toole, C. G. Tinney, G. W. Marcey, F. Kienzle, and F.
Carrier, 2001, “Evidence for solar-like oscillations in beta
Hydri,” Astrophys. J. 549, L105–L108.
Bertello, L., F. Varadi, R. K. Ulrich, C. J. Henney, A. G.
Kosovichev, R. A. Garcı́a, and S. Turck-Chièze, 2000, “Identification of solar acoustic modes of low angular degree and
low radial order,” Astrophys. J. 537, L143–L146.
Berthomieu, G., A. J. Cooper, D. O. Gough, Y. Osaki, J.
Provost, and A. Rocca, 1980, “Sensitivity of five minute
eigenfrequencies to the structure of the Sun,” in Nonradial
and Nonlinear Stellar Pulsation, Lecture Notes in Physics
125, edited by H. A. Hill and W. Dziembowski (Springer,
Berlin), p. 307–312.
Birch, A. C., and A. G. Kosovichev, 1998, “Latitudinal variation of solar subsurface rotation inferred from p-mode frequency splittings measured with SOI-MDI and GONG,” Astrophys. J. 503, L187–L190.
Birch, A. C., and A. G. Kosovichev, 2000, “Travel time sensitivity kernels,” Solar Phys. 192, 193–201.
Birch, A. C., and A. G. Kosovichev, 2001, “The Born approximation in time-distance helioseismology,” in Proceedings of
the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the Millennium, ESA SP-464,
edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 187–190.
Birch, A. C., A. G. Kosovichev, G. H. Price, and R. B.
Schlottmann, 2001, “The accuracy of the Born and ray approximations in time-distance helioseismology,” Astrophys.
J. 561, L229–L232.
Bogdan, T. J., 1997, “A comment on the relationship between
the modal and time-distance formulations of local helioseismology,” Astrophys. J. 477, 475–484.
Bogdan, T. J., and D. C. Braun, 1995, “Active region seismology,” in Proc. Fourth SOHO Workshop: Helioseismology,
ESA SP-376, vol. 1, edited by J. T. Hoeksema, V. Domingo,
B. Fleck, and B. Battrick (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 31–45.
Bouchy, F., and F. Carrier, 2001, “P-mode observations on α
Cen A,” Astron. Astrophys. 374, L5–L8.
Boury, A., M. Gabriel, A. Noels, R. Scuflaire, and P. Ledoux,
1975, “Vibrational instability of a 1 M⊙ star towards nonradial oscillations,” Astron. Astrophys. 41, 279–285.
Braun, D. C., T. L. Duvall, Jr, and B. J. LaBonte, 1987,
“Acoustic absorption by sunspots,” Astrophys. J. 319, L27–
L31.
Braun, D. C., and C. Lindsey, 2000, “Helioseismic holography
of active region subphotospheres,” Solar Phys. 192, 285–
305.
Braun, D. C., and C. Lindsey, 2001, “Seismic imaging of the
far hemisphere of the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 560, L189–L192.
Braun, D. C., C. Lindsey, Y. Fan, and M. Fagan, 1998, “Seismic holography of solar activity,” Astrophys. J. 502, 968–
980.
Breger, M., and M. H. Montgomery, (eds), 2000, Delta Scuti
and related stars, ASP Conference Series, vol. 210 (ASP, San
Francisco), pp. i–xv, 1–582.
Brodskiı̌, M. A., and A. Levshin, 1977, “Asimptoticheskiy
metod opredeleniya skorostnogo razreza Zemli po chastotam yeye sobstvennykh kolebaniy,” Dodl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR

Balmforth, N. J., 1992a, “Solar pulsational stability. I:
Pulsation-mode thermodynamics,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 255, 603–631.
Balmforth, N. J., 1992b, “Solar pulsational stability. III:
Acoustical excitation by turbulent convection,” Mon. Not.
R. Astron. Soc. 255, 639–649.
Balmforth, N. J., D. O. Gough, and W. J. Merryfield, 1996,
“Structural changes to the Sun through the solar cycle,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 278, 437–448.
Bartenwerfer, D., 1973, “Differential rotation, magnetic fields
and the solar neutrino flux,” Astron. Astrophys. 25, 455–
456.
Basu, S., 1998, “Effects of errors in the solar radius on helioseismic inferences,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 298, 719–
728.
Basu, S., and H. M. Antia, 1995, “Helium abundance in the
solar envelope,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 276, 1402–1408.
Basu, S., and H. M. Antia, 1997, “Seismic measurement of the
depth of the solar convection zone,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 287, 189–198.
Basu, S., and H. M. Antia, 2001, “A study of possible temporal and latitudinal variations in the properties of the solar
tachocline,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 324, 498–508.
Basu, S., H. M. Antia, and D. Narasimha, 1994, “Helioseismic measurement of the extent of overshoot below the solar
convection zone,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 267, 209–224.
Basu, S., H. M. Antia, and S. C. Tripathy, 1999, “Ring diagram analysis of near-surface flows in the Sun,” Astrophys.
J. 512, 458–470.
Basu, S., W. J. Chaplin, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, Y.
Elsworth, G. R. Isaak, R. New, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and S. Tomczyk, 1997b, “Solar internal sound speed as
inferred from combined BiSON and LOWL oscillation frequencies,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 292, 243–251.
Basu, S., and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1997, “Equation of
state and helioseismic inversions,” Astron. Astrophys. 322,
L5–L8.
Basu, S., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and M. J. Thompson,
1997a, “SVD preprocessing of helioseismic data for solar
structure inversion,” Astron. Astrophys. 321, 634–642.
Basu, S., W. Däppen, and A. Nayfonov, 1999, “Helioseismic
analysis of the hydrogen partition function in the solar interior,” Astrophys. J. 518, 985–993.
Basu, S., M. H. Pinsonneault, and J. N. Bahcall, 2000, “How
much do helioseismological inferences depend on the assumed reference model?” Astrophys. J. 529, 1084–1100.
Basu, S., and M. J. Thompson, 1996, “On constructing seismic models of the Sun,” Astron. Astrophys. 305, 631–642.
Batchelor, G. K., 1956, The theory of homogeneous turbulence. (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England).
Baturin, V. A., W. Däppen, D. O. Gough, and S. V.
Vorontsov, 2000, “Seismology of the solar envelope: soundspeed gradient in the convection zone and its diagnosis of the
equation of state,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 316, 71–83.
Baturin, V. A., and I. V. Mironova, 1990, “On the possibility of determining helium abundance from helioseismological
data,” Pis’ma Astron. Zh. 16, 253–259 [Sov. Astron. Lett.
16, 108–111 (1990)].
Beck, J. G., 2000, “A comparison of differential rotation measurements,” Solar Phys. 191, 47–70.

47

1032–1041. (Erratum: Astrophys. J. 536, 1005).
Buzasi, D., J. Catanzarite, R. Laher, T. Conrow, D. Shupe,
T. N. Gautier III, T. Kreidl, and D. Everett, 2000, “The
detection of multimodal oscillations on α Ursae Majoris,”
Astrophys. J. 532, L133–L136.
Cacciani, A., and M. Fofi, 1978, “The magneto-optical filter.
II. Velocity field measurements,” Solar Phys. 59, 179–189.
Carpenter, K. G., and C. J. Schrijver, 2000, “A dream of a
mission: stellar imager and seismic probe,” Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 32, 721.
Castellani, V., S. Degl’Innocenti, G. Fiorentini, M. Lissia,
and B. Ricci, 1997, “Solar neutrinos: Beyond standard solar
models,” Phys. Rep. 281, 309–398.
Cattaneo, F., 1997, “The solar dynamo problem,” in
SCORe’96: Solar Convection and Oscillations and their Relationship, edited by F. P. Pijpers, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard,
and C. S. Rosenthal (Kluwer, Dordrecht), p. 201–222.
Chaboyer, B., 1998, “Internal rotation, mixing and lithium
abundance,” in Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 185: New
Eyes to see Inside the Sun and Stars, edited by F.-L. Deubner, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and D. W. Kurtz (Kluwer,
Dordrecht), p. 25–36.
Chaboyer, B., P. Demarque, and M. H. Pinsonneault, 1995,
“Stellar models with microscopic diffusion and rotational
mixing. I. Application to the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 441, 865–
875.
Chandrasekhar, S., 1964, “A general variational principle governing the radial and the non-radial oscillations of gaseous
masses,” Astrophys. J. 139, 664–674.
Chang, H.-K., D.-Y. Chou, B. LaBonte, and the TON Team,
1997, “Ambient acoustic imaging in helioseismology,” Nature (London) 389, 825–827.
Chang, H.-Y., and D. O. Gough, 1998, “On the power distribution of solar p modes,” Solar Phys. 181, 251–263.
Chaplin, W. J., and T. Appourchaux, 1999, “Depth of excitation and reversal of asymmetry of low-ℓ solar p modes: a
complementary analysis of BiSON and VIRGO/SPM data,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 309, 761–768.
Chaplin, W. J., T. Appourchaux, Y. Elsworth, G. R. Isaak,
and R. New, 2001b, “The phenomenology of solar-cycleinduced acoustic eigenfrequency variations: a comparative and complementary analysis of GONG, BiSON and
VIRGO/LOI data,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 324, 910–
916.
Chaplin, W. J., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, Y. Elsworth, R.
Howe, G. R. Isaak, R. M. Larsen, R. New, J. Schou, M. J.
Thompson, and S. Tomczyk, 1999b, “Rotation of the solar
core from BiSON and LOWL frequency observations,” Mon.
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 308, 405–414.
Chaplin, W. J., Y. Elsworth, R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P.
McLeod, B. A. Miller, and R. New, 1997, “The observation and simulation of stochastically excited solar p modes,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 287, 51–56.
Chaplin, W. J., Y. Elsworth, R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P.
McLeod, B. A. Miller, H. B. van der Raay, S. J. Wheeler,
and R. New, 1996, “BiSON performance,” Solar Phys. 168,
1–18.
Chaplin, W. J., Y. Elsworth, G. R. Isaak, K. I. Marchenkov,
B. A. Miller, and R. New, 2001a, “Rigid rotation of the solar
core? On the reliable extraction of low-ℓ rotational p-mode

233, 312–315.
Brodskiı̌, M. A., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1989, “The inverse
problem of helioseismology: probing the structure of the
lower solar atmosphere,” Pis’ma Astron. Zh. 15, 61–69 [Sov.
Astron. Lett. 15, 27–30 (1989)].
Brodsky, M. A., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1993, “Asymptotic theory of intermediate- and high-degree solar acoustic oscillations,” Astrophys. J. 409, 455–464.
Brookes, J. R., G. R. Isaak, and H. B. van der Raay, 1976,
“Observation of free oscillations of the Sun,” Nature (London) 259, 92–95.
Brown, T. M., 1984, “The Fourier tachometer II – An instrument for measuring global solar velocity fields,” in Proceedings of Conference on Solar Seismology from Space, JPL
Publ. 84 – 84, edited by R. K. Ulrich, J. Harvey, J., E. J.
Rhodes, Jr., and J. Toomre (NASA, Pasadena), p. 157–163.
Brown, T. M., 1985, “Solar rotation as a function of depth
and latitude,” Nature (London) 317, 591–594.
Brown, T. M., 1988, “Techniques for observing solar oscillations,” in Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 123, Advances
in helio- and asteroseismology, edited by J. ChristensenDalsgaard and S. Frandsen (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 453–465.
Brown, T. M., 1990, “An inverse method for p-mode scattering measurements,” Solar Phys. 128, 133–141.
Brown, T. M., 1996, “Techniques for observing solar oscillations,” in Proceedings of the VI IAC Winter School “The
structure of the Sun”, edited by T. Roca Cortés and F.
Sánchez (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England), p. 1–
45.
Brown, T. M., and Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 1998, “Accurate determination of the solar photospheric radius,” Astrophys. J. 500, L195–L198.
Brown, T. M., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, W. A. Dziembowski,
P. Goode, D. O. Gough, and C. A. Morrow, 1989, “Inferring
the Sun’s internal angular velocity from observed p-mode
frequency splittings,” Astrophys. J. 343, 526–546.
Brown, T. M., R. L. Gilliland, R. W. Noyes, and L. W. Ramsey, 1991, “Detection of possible p-mode oscillations of Procyon,” Astrophys. J. 368, 599–609.
Brown, T. M., E. J. Kennelly, S. G. Korzennik, P. Nisenson,
R. W. Noyes, and S. D. Horner, 1997, “A radial velocity
search for p-mode pulsations in η Bootis,” Astrophys. J.
475, 322–327.
Brown, T. M., and C. A. Morrow, 1987, “Depth and latitude
dependence of solar rotation,” Astrophys. J. 314, L21–L26.
Brown, T. M., R. T. Stebbins, and H. A. Hill, 1978, “Longperiod oscillations of the apparent solar diameter: Observations,” Astrophys. J. 223, 324–338.
Brüggen, M., and D. O. Gough, 1997, “On electrostatic
screening of ions in astrophysical plasmas,” Astrophys. J.
488, 867–871.
Brun, A. S., and J. Toomre, 2002, “Turbulent convection under the influence of rotation: sustaining a strong differential
rotation,” Astrophys. J. 570, 865–885.
Brun, A. S., S. Turck-Chièze, and P. Morel, 1998, “Standard
solar models in the light of new helioseismic constraints. I.
The solar core,” Astrophys. J. 506, 913–925.
Brun, A. S., S. Turck-Chièze, and J. P. Zahn, 1999, “Standard
solar models in the light of new helioseismic constraints.
II. Mixing below the convection zone,” Astrophys. J. 525,

48

Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., F. W. W. Dilke, and D. O. Gough,
1974, “The stability of a solar model to non-radial oscillations,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 169, 429–445.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., T. L. Duvall, Jr., D. O. Gough,
J. W. Harvey, and E. J. Rhodes, Jr., 1985, “Speed of sound
in the solar interior,” Nature (London) 315, 378–382.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and S. Frandsen, 1983, “Stellar 5
min oscillations,” Solar Phys. 82, 469–486.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and D. O. Gough, 1976, “Towards
a heliological inverse problem,” Nature (London) 259, 89–
92.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and D. O. Gough, 1980a, “Implications of the whole-disk Doppler observations of the Sun,”
in Nonradial and Nonlinear Stellar Pulsation, Lecture Notes
in Physics 125, edited by H. A. Hill and W. Dziembowski
(Springer, Berlin), p. 184–190.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and D. O. Gough, 1980b, “Is the
Sun helium-deficient?” Nature (London) 288, 544–547.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and D. O. Gough, 1982, “On the
interpretation of five-minute oscillations in solar spectrum
line shifts,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 198, 141–171.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and D. O. Gough, 2001, “On the
dipolar f mode of stellar oscillation,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 326, 1115–1121.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., D. O. Gough, and K. G. Libbrecht,
1989, “Seismology of solar oscillation line widths,” Astrophys. J. 341, L103–L106.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., D. O. Gough, and F. Pérez
Hernández, 1988, “Stellar disharmony,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 235, 875–880.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., D. O. Gough, and M. J. Thompson, 1989, “Differential asymptotic sound-speed inversions,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 238, 481–502.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., D. O. Gough, and M. J. Thompson, 1991, “The depth of the solar convection zone,” Astrophys. J. 378, 413–437.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., P. C. Hansen, and M. J. Thompson, 1993, “Generalized singular value decomposition analysis of helioseismic inversions,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
264, 541–564.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., H. Kjeldsen, and J. A. Mattei,
2001, “Solar-like oscillations of semiregular variables,” Astrophys. J. 562, L141–L144.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and F. Pérez Hernández, 1992,
“Phase-function differences for stellar acoustic oscillations
– I. Theory,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 257, 62–88.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., C. R. Proffitt, and M. J. Thompson, 1993, “Effects of diffusion on solar models and their
oscillation frequencies,” Astrophys. J. 403, L75–L78.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and J. Schou, 1988, “Differential
rotation in the solar interior,” in Seismology of the Sun &
Sun-like Stars, ESA SP-286, edited by V. Domingo and E. J.
Rolfe (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 149–153.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., J. Schou, and M. J. Thompson,
1990, “A comparison of methods for inverting helioseismic
data,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 242, 353–369.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and M. J. Thompson, 1993, “A
preprocessing strategy for helioseismic inversions,” Astron.
Astrophys. 272, L1–L4.

splittings from full-disc observations of the Sun,” Mon. Not.
R. Astron. Soc. 327, 1127–1136.
Chaplin, W. J., Y. Elsworth, G. R. Isaak, K. I. Marchenkov,
B. A. Miller, and R. New, 2001c, “Changes to low-ℓ solar
p-mode frequencies over the solar cycle: correlations on different time-scales,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 322, 22–30.
Chaplin, W. J., Y. Elsworth, G. R. Isaak, B. A. Miller, and R.
New, 1999a, “Skew-symmetric solar p modes in low-ℓ BiSON
data,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 308, 424–430.
Charbonneau, P., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, R. Henning,
R. M. Larsen, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and S. Tomczyk,
1999, “Helioseismic constraints on the structure of the solar
tachocline,” Astrophys. J. 527, 445–460.
Charbonneau, P., and K. B. MacGregor, 1997, “Solar interface dynamos. II. Linear, kinematic models in spherical geometry,” Astrophys. J. 486, 502–520.
Charbonneau, P., S. Tomczyk, J. Schou, and M. J. Thompson,
1998, “The rotation of the solar core inferred by genetic
forward modeling,” Astrophys. J. 496, 1015–1030.
Chen, H.-R., D.-Y. Chou, H.-K. Chang, M.-T. Sun, S.-J. Yeh,
B. LaBonte, and the TON Team, 1998, “Probing the subsurface structure of active regions with the phase information
in acoustic imaging,” Astrophys. J. 501, L139–L144.
Chou, D.-Y., 2000, “Acoustic imaging of solar active regions,”
Solar Phys. 192, 241–259.
Chou, D.-Y., and D.-C. Dai, 2001, “Solar cycle variations of
subsurface meridional flows in the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 559,
L175–L178.
Chou, D.-Y., M.-T. Sun, T.-Y. Huang, et al., 1995, “Taiwan
Oscillation Network,” Solar Phys. 160, 237–243.
Choudhuri, A. R., 1990, “On the possibility of an α2 ω-type
dynamo in a thin layer inside the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 355,
733–744.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 1980, “On adiabatic non-radial oscillations with moderate or large l,” Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc.
190, 765–791.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 1984, “What will asteroseismology
teach us?” in Space Research Prospects in Stellar Activity and Variability, edited by A. Mangeney and F. Praderie
(Paris Observatory, Paris), p. 11–45.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 1988, “A Hertzsprung-Russell diagram for stellar oscillations,” in Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 123, Advances in helio- and asteroseismology,
edited by J. Christensen-Dalsgaard and S. Frandsen (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 295–298.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 1998, “The ‘standard Sun’. Modelling and helioseismology,” Space Science Review 85, 19–
36.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., 2002, “MONS on the Danish
Rømer satellite: Measuring Oscillations in Nearby Stars,” in
Proc. 1st Eddington Workshop, ‘Stellar Structure and Habitable Planet Finding’, ESA SP-485, eds F. Favata, I. W.
Roxburgh and D. Galadi (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 25–34.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., T. R. Bedding, and H. Kjeldsen,
1995, “Modelling solar-like oscillations in η Bootis,” Astrophys. J. 443, L29–L32.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., W. Däppen, S. V. Ajukov, et al.,
1996, “The current state of solar modeling,” Science 272,
1286–1292.

49

Däppen, W., D. O. Gough, A. G. Kosovichev, and M. J.
Thompson, 1991, “A new inversion for the hydrostatic stratification of the Sun,” in Challenges to Theories of the Structure of Moderate-Mass Stars, Lecture Notes in Physics 388,
edited by D. O. Gough and J. Toomre (Springer, Berlin),
p. 111–120.
Däppen, W., and J. A. Guzik, 2000, “Astrophysical equation
of state and opacity,” in Variable Stars as Essential Astrophysical Tools, NATO Science Series C, vol. 544, edited by
C. İbanoğlu (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht), p. 177–212.
Davis, R., Jr., D. S. Harmer, and K. C. Hoffman, 1968,
“Search for neutrinos from the Sun,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 20,
1205–1209.
Delache, P., and P. H. Scherrer, 1983, “Detection of solar
gravity mode oscillations,” Nature (London) 306, 651–653.
Demarque, P., J. G. Mengel, and A. V. Sweigart, 1973, “Rotating solar models with low neutrino flux,” Astrophys. J.
183, 997–1004.
Deubner, F.-L., 1975, “Observations of low wavenumber nonradial eigenmodes of the Sun,” Astron. Astrophys. 44, 371–
375.
Deubner, F.-L., and D. O. Gough, 1984, “Helioseismology:
Oscillations as a diagnostic of the solar interior,” Ann. Rev.
Astron. Astrophys. 22, 593–619.
Di Mauro, M. P., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, M. C. RabelloSoares, and S. Basu, 2002, “Inferences on the solar envelope
with high-degree modes,” Astron. Astrophys. 384, 666–677.
Di Mauro, M. P., and W. A. Dziembowski, 1998, “Differential
rotation of the solar interior: new helioseismic results by
inversion of the SOI-MDI/SOHO data,” Mem. Soc. Astron.
Ital. 69, 559–562.
Dicke, R. H., 1964, “The Sun’s rotation and relativity,” Nature (London) 202, 432–435.
Dilke, F. W. W., and D. O. Gough, 1972, “The solar spoon,”
Nature (London) 240, 262–264 and 293–294.
Domingo, V., B. Fleck, and A. I. Poland, 1995, “The SOHO
mission: an overview,” Solar Phys. 162, 1–37.
D’Silva, S., 1996, “Theoretical foundations of time-distance
helioseismology,” Astrophys. J. 469, 964–975.
D’Silva, S., T. L. Duvall, Jr., S. M. Jefferies, and J. W. Harvey, 1996, “Helioseismic tomography,” Astrophys. J. 471,
1030–1043.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., 1982, “A dispersion law for solar oscillations,” Nature (London) 300, 242–243.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., 1995, “Other groundbased observations,”
in Proceedings of the Fourth SOHO Workshop: Helioseismology, ESA SP-376, vol. 1, edited by J. T. Hoeksema, V.
Domingo, B. Fleck, and B. Battrick (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 107–111.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., W. A. Dziembowski, P. R. Goode, D. O.
Gough, J. W. Harvey, and J. W. Leibacher, 1984, “The
internal rotation of the Sun,” Nature (London) 310, 22–25.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., and L. Gizon, 2000, “Time-distance helioseismology with f modes as a method for measurement of
near-surface flows,” Solar Phys. 192, 177–191.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., and J. W. Harvey, 1983, “Observations of
solar oscillations of low and intermediate degree,” Nature
(London) 302, 24–27.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., J. W. Harvey, and M. A. Pomerantz, 1986,
“Latitude and depth variation of solar rotation,” Nature

Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., and M. J. Thompson, 1997, “On
solar p-mode frequency shifts caused by near-surface model
changes,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 284, 527–540.
Claverie, A., G. R. Isaak, C. P. McLeod, H. B. van der Raay,
and T. Roca Cortes, 1979, “Solar structure from global studies of the 5-minute oscillation,” Nature (London) 282, 591–
594.
Cleveland, B. T., T. Daily, R. Davis, Jr., J. R. Distel, K.
Lande, C. K. Lee, P. S. Wildenhain, and J. Ullman, 1998,
“Measurement of the solar electron neutrino flux with the
Homestake chlorine detector,” Astrophys. J. 496, 505–526.
Corbard, T., G. Berthomieu, P. Morel, J. Provost, J. Schou,
and S. Tomczyk, 1997, “Solar internal rotation from LOWL
data. A 2D regularized least-squares inversion using Bsplines,” Astron. Astrophys. 324, 298–310.
Corbard, T., G. Berthomieu, J. Provost, and P. Morel, 1998a,
“Inferring the equatorial solar tachocline from frequency
splittings,” Astron. Astrophys. 330, 1149–1159.
Corbard, T., L. Blanc-Féraud, G. Berthomieu, and J. Provost,
1999, “Non linear regularization for helioseismic inversions.
Application for the study of the solar tachocline,” Astron.
Astrophys. 344, 696–708.
Corbard, T., M. P. Di Mauro, T. Sekii, and the GOLF team,
1998b, “The solar internal rotation from GOLF splittings,”
in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun and Sun-like
stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson
(ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands),
p. 741–746.
Covas, E., R. Tavakol, and D. Moss, 2001, “Dynamical variations of the differential rotation in the solar convection
zone,” Astron. Astrophys. 371, 718–730.
Covas, E., R. Tavakol, D. Moss, and A. Tworkowski, 2000,
“Torsional oscillations in the solar convection zone,” Astron.
Astrophys. 360, L21–L24.
Cowling, T. G., 1941, “The non-radial oscillations of polytropic stars,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 101, 367–375.
Cowling, T. G., and R. A. Newing, 1949, “The oscillations of
a rotating star,” Astrophys. J. 109, 149–158.
Cox, A. N., J. A. Guzik, and R. B. Kidman, 1989, “Oscillations of solar models with internal element diffusion,” Astrophys. J. 342, 1187–1206.
Craig, I. J. D., and J. C. Brown, 1986, Inverse problems in astronomy: a guide to inversion strategies for remotely sensed
data, (Adam Hilger, Bristol).
Cunha, M., M. Brüggen, and D. O. Gough, 1998, “On solar
frequency changes,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG
98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the
Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 905–910.
Cuypers, J., 1980, “On the calculation of the frequency splitting of adiabatic nonradial stellar oscillations by slow differential rotation,” Astron. Astrophys. 89, 207–208.
Däppen, W., 1998, “Microphysics: equation of state,” Space
Science Review 85, 49–60.
Däppen, W., and D. O. Gough, 1986, “Progress report on
helium abundance determination,” in Seismology of the Sun
and the Distant Stars, edited by D. O. Gough (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 275–280.

50

“Slow rotation of the Sun’s interior,” Nature (London) 376,
669–672.
Elsworth, Y., R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P. McLeod, B. A.
Miller, H. B. van der Raay, and S. J. Wheeler, 1995a, “Performance of the BISON network 1981-present,” in Proceedings of GONG’94: Helio- and Astero-seismology from Earth
and Space, ASP Conference Series, vol. 76, edited by R. K.
Ulrich, E. J. Rhodes, Jr., and W. Däppen (ASP, San Francisco), p. 392–397.
Elsworth, Y., R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P. McLeod, and R.
New, 1990, “Evidence from solar seismology against nonstandard solar-core models,” Nature (London) 347, 536–
539.
Evans, J. W., and R. Michard, 1962, “Observational study of
macroscopic inhomogeneities in the solar atmosphere. III.
Vertical oscillatory motions in the solar photosphere,” Astrophys. J. 136, 493–506.
Ezer, D., and A. G. W. Cameron, 1968, “Solar spin-down and
neutrino fluxes,” Astrophys. Lett. 1, 177–179.
Faulkner, J., and R. L. Gilliland, 1985, “Weakly interacting,
massive particles and the solar neutrino flux,” Astrophys. J.
299, 994–1000.
Favata, F., 2002, “The Eddington baseline mission,” in Proc.
1st Eddington Workshop, ‘Stellar Structure and Habitable
Planet Finding’, ESA SP-485, eds F. Favata, I. W. Roxburgh
and D. Galadi (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands), p. 3–10.
Finsterle, W., and C. Fröhlich, 2001, “Low-order p modes
from VIRGO irradiance data,” Solar Phys. 200, 393–406.
Fiorentini, G., M. Lissia, and B. Ricci, 1999, “Helioseismic
tests of diffusion theory,” Astron. Astrophys. 342, 492–495.
Fossat, E., 1991, “The IRIS network for full disk helioseismology: Present status of the programme,” Solar Phys. 133,
1–12.
Fossat, E., and G. Ricort, 1975, “Photospheric oscillations.
I. Large scale observations by optical resonance method,”
Astron. Astrophys. 43, 243–252.
Frazier, E. N., 1968, “A spatio-temporal analysis of the velocity fields in the solar photosphere,” Z. Astrophys. 68,
345–356.
Fröhlich, C., D. A. Crommelynck, C. Wehrli, M. Anklin, S.
Dewitte, A. Fichot, W. Finsterle, A. Jiménez, A. Chevalier,
and H. Roth, 1997, “In-flight performance of the VIRGO
solar irradiance instrument on SOHO,” Solar Phys. 175,
267–286.
Fröhlich, C., and Ph. Delache, 1984, “Solar gravity modes
from ACRIM/SMM irradiance data,” Mem. Soc. Astron.
Ital. 55, 99–105.
Fröhlich, C., J. Romero, H. Roth, et al., 1995, “VIRGO: Experiment for helioseismology and solar irradiance monitoring,” Solar Phys. 162, 101–128.
Fukuda, S., Y. Fukuda, M. Ishitsuka, et al., 2001, “Solar 8 B
and hep neutrino measurements from 1258 days of SuperKamiokande data,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5651–5655.
Fukuda, Y., T. Hayakawa, E. Ichihara, et al., 1998, “Measurement of a small atmospheric νµ /νe ratio,” Phys. Lett.
B 433, 9–18.
Gabriel, A. H., J. Charra, G. Grec, et al., 1997, “Performance
and early results from the GOLF instrument flown on the
SOHO mission,” Solar Phys. 175, 207–226.

(London) 321, 500–501.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., S. M. Jefferies, J. W. Harvey, Y. Osaki, and
M. A. Pomerantz, 1993a, “Asymmetries of solar oscillation
line profiles,” Astrophys. J. 410, 829–836.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., S. M. Jefferies, J. W. Harvey, and M. A.
Pomerantz, 1993b, “Time-distance helioseismology,” Nature
(London) 362, 430–432.
Duvall, T. L., Jr., and A. G. Kosovichev, 2001, “New developments in local area helioseismology,” in Proceedings of IAU
Symposium No 203: Recent insights into the physics of the
Sun and heliosphere: Highlights from SOHO and other space
missions, edited by P. Brekke, B. Fleck, and J. B. Gurman
(ASP, San Francisco), p. 159–166.
Dziembowski, W. A., 1977, “Light and radial velocity variations in a nonradially oscillating star,” Acta Astron. 27,
203–211.
Dziembowski, W. A., P. R. Goode, M. P. Di Mauro, A. G.
Kosovichev, and J. Schou, 1998, “Solar cycle onset seen in
SOHO Michelson Doppler Imager seismic data,” Astrophys.
J. 509, 456–460.
Dziembowski, W. A., P. R. Goode, A. G. Kosovichev, and J.
Schou, 2000, “Signatures of the rise of cycle 23,” Astrophys.
J. 537, 1026–1038.
Dziembowski, W. A., P. R. Goode, and K. G. Libbrecht, 1989,
“The radial gradient in the Sun’s rotation,” Astrophys. J.
337, L53–L57.
Dziembowski, W. A., P. R. Goode, A. A. Pamyatnykh, and R.
Sienkiewicz, 1994, “A seismic model of the Sun’s interior,”
Astrophys. J. 432, 417–426.
Dziembowski, W. A., P. R. Goode, and J. Schou, 2001, “Does
the Sun shrink with increasing magnetic activity?” Astrophys. J. 553, 897–904.
Dziembowski, W. A., A. A. Pamyatnykh, and R. Sienkiewicz,
1990, “Solar model from the helioseismology and the neutrino flux problem,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 244, 542–
550.
Dziembowski, W. A., A. A. Pamyatnykh, and R. Sienkiewicz,
1991, “Helium content in the solar convective envelope from
helioseismology,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 249, 602–605.
Dziewonski, A. M., and J. H. Woodhouse, 1987, “Global images of the Earth’s interior,” Science 236, 37–48.
Eff-Darwich, A., and S. G. Korzennik, 1998, “Rotation of the
solar core: compatibility of the different data sets available,”
in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun and Sun-like
stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson
(ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands),
p. 685–692.
Elliott, J. R., and D. O. Gough, 1999, “Calibration of the
thickness of the solar tachocline,” Astrophys. J. 516, 475–
481.
Elliott, J. R., and A. G. Kosovichev, 1998, “The adiabatic
exponent in the solar core,” Astrophys. J. 500, L199–L202.
Elsworth, Y., R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P. McLeod, B. A.
Miller, R. New, C. C. Speake, and S. J. Wheeler, 1994, “Solar p-mode frequencies and their dependence on solar activity: recent results from the BISON network,” Astrophys. J.
434, 801–806.
Elsworth, Y., R. Howe, G. R. Isaak, C. P. McLeod, B. A.
Miller, R. New, S. J. Wheeler, and D. O. Gough, 1995b,

51

implications of recent oscillation measurements,” Astrophys.
J. 338, 528–537.
Gizon, L., E. Fossat, M. Lazrek, et al., 1997, “New IRIS constraints on the solar core rotation,” Astron. Astrophys. 317,
L71–L74.
Glatzmaier, G., 1985, “Numerical simulations of stellar convective dynamos. II. Field propagation in the convection
zone,” Astrophys. J. 291, 300–307.
Goldreich, P., and D. A. Keeley, 1977, “Solar seismology. II.
The stochastic excitation of the solar p-modes by turbulent
convection,” Astrophys. J. 212, 243–251.
Goldreich, P., and P. Kumar, 1990, “Wave generation by turbulent convection,” Astrophys. J. 363, 694–704.
Goldreich, P., N. Murray, and P. Kumar, 1994, “Excitation
of solar p-modes,” Astrophys. J. 424, 466–479.
Goldreich, P., N. Murray, G. Willette, and P. Kumar, 1991,
“Implications of solar p-mode frequency shifts,” Astrophys.
J. 370, 752–762.
Gong, Z., W. Däppen, and L. Zejda, 2001, “MHD equation of
state with relativistic electrons,” Astrophys. J. 546, 1178–
1182.
González Hernández, I., J. Patrón, R. S. Bogart, and the SOI
Ring Diagrams Team, 1998a, “Synoptic map of the subsurface velocity flow,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG
98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the
Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 587–595.
González Hernández, I., J. Patrón, R. S. Bogart, and the SOI
Ring Diagrams Team, 1998b, “Meridional flows from ring
diagram analysis,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG
98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the
Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 781–786.
Goode, P. R., W. A. Dziembowski, S. G. Korzennik, and E. J.
Rhodes, Jr., 1991, “What we know about the Sun’s internal
rotation from solar oscillations,” Astrophys. J. 367, 649–
657.
Goode, P. R., and J. R. Kuhn, 1990, “Consistency in trends
in helioseismic data and photospheric temperature data
through the solar cycle,” Astrophys. J. 356, 310–314.
Gough, D. O., 1976, “The current state of stellar mixinglength theory,” in Proceedings of IAU Colloquium No. 38:
Problems of stellar convection, Lecture Notes in Physics 71,
edited by E. A. Spiegel and J.-P. Zahn (Springer, Berlin),
p. 15–56.
Gough, D. O., 1977a, “Mixing-length theory for pulsating
stars,” Astrophys. J. 214, 196–213.
Gough, D. O., 1977b, “Random remarks on solar hydrodynamics,” in Proceedings of IAU Colloquium No. 36: The energy balance and hydrodynamics of the solar chromosphere
and corona, edited by R. M. Bonnet and P. Delache (G. de
Bussac, Clairmont-Ferrand), p. 3–36.
Gough, D. O., 1981, “A new measure of the solar rotation,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 196, 731–745.
Gough, D. O., 1982, “A review of the theory of solar oscillations and its implications concerning the internal structure of the Sun,” in Pulsations in Classical and Cataclysmic
Variable Stars, edited by J. P. Cox and C. J. Hansen (JILA,

Gabriel, A. H., G. Grec, J. Charra, et al., 1995, “Global oscillations at low frequency from the SOHO mission (GOLF),”
Solar Phys. 162, 61–99.
Gabriel, A. H., S. Turck-Chièze, R. A. Garcı́a, P. L. Pallé,
P. Boumier, S. Thiery, G. Grec, R. K. Ulrich, L. Bertello,
T. Roca Cortés, and J.-M. Robillot, 1998, “Search for gmode frequencies in the GOLF oscillations spectrum,” in
Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure
and dynamics of the interior of the Sun and Sun-like stars,
ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA
Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 61–
66.
Gabriel, M., 1993, “On the location of the excitation of solar
p-modes,” Astron. Astrophys. 274, 935–939.
Gabriel, M., 1997, “Influence of heavy element and rotationally induced diffusions on solar models,” Astron. Astrophys.
327, 771–778.
Gabriel, M., 2000, “Linear interaction between pulsations and
convection, scattering and line profiles of solar p-modes,”
Astron. Astrophys. 353, 399–408.
Garaud, P., 2002, “Dynamics of the solar tachocline – I. An
incompressible study,” Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 329, 1–17.
Garcı́a, R. A., C. Régulo, S. Turck-Chièze, L. Bertello, A. G.
Kosovichev, A. S. Brun, S. Couvidat, C. J. Henney, M.
Lazrek, R. K. Ulrich, and F. Varadi, 2001, “Low-degree loworder solar p modes as seen by GOLF on board SOHO,”
Solar Phys. 200, 361–379.
Gavrin, V. N., 2001, “Solar neutrino results from SAGE,”
Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl) 91, 36–43.
Genovese, C. R., P. B. Stark, and M. J. Thompson, 1995,
“Uncertainties for two-dimensional models of solar rotation
from helioseismic eigenfrequency splitting,” Astrophys. J.
443, 843–854.
Georgobiani, D., A. G. Kosovichev, R. Nigam, Å. Nordlund,
and R. F. Stein, 2000, “Numerical simulations of oscillation modes of the solar convection zone,” Astrophys. J. 530,
L139–L142.
Giles, P. M., T. L. Duvall, Jr., P. H. Scherrer, and R. S.
Bogart, 1997, “A subsurface flow of material from the Sun’s
equator to its poles,” Nature (London) 390, 52–54.
Gilliland, R. L., T. M. Brown, H. Kjeldsen, J. K. McCarthy,
M. L. Peri, J. A. Belmonte, I. Vidal, L Cram, Palmer E.,
J., S. Frandsen, M. Parthasarathy, L. Petro, H. Schneider,
P. B. Stetson, and W. W. Weiss, 1993, “A search for solarlike oscillations in the stars of M67 with CCD ensemble photometry on a network of 4 m telescopes,” Astron. J. 106,
2441–2476.
Gilliland, R. L., J. Faulkner, W. H. Press, and D. N. Spergel,
1986, “Solar models with energy transport by weakly interacting particles,” Astrophys. J. 306, 703–709.
Gilman, P. A., 1986, “The solar dynamo: observations and
theories of solar convection, global circulation, and magnetic
fields,” in Physics of the Sun, Vol. 1, edited by P. A. Sturrock, T. E. Holzer, D. Mihalas, and R. K. Ulrich (Reidel,
Dordrecht), p. 95–160.
Gilman, P. A., and J. Miller, 1986, “Nonlinear convection of a
compressible fluid in a rotating spherical shell,” Astrophys.
J. Suppl. Ser. 61, 585–608.
Gilman, P. A., C. A. Morrow, and E. E. DeLuca, 1989, “Angular momentum transport and dynamo action in the Sun:

52

Gough, D. O., and M. J. Thompson, 1990, “The effect of
rotation and a buried magnetic field on stellar oscillations,”
Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 242, 25–55.
Gough, D. O., and M. J. Thompson, 1991, “The inversion
problem,” in Solar interior and atmosphere, Space Science
Series, edited by A. N. Cox, W. C. Livingston, and M.
Matthews (University of Arizona Press, Tucson), p. 519–
561.
Gough, D. O., and J. Toomre, 1983, “On the detection of
subphotospheric convective velocities and temperature fluctuations,” Solar Phys. 82, 401–410.
Gough, D. O., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1995, “Seismology of the
solar envelope: measuring the acoustic phase shift generated
in the outer layers,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 273, 573–
582.
Gough, D. O., and N. O. Weiss, 1976, “The calibration of
stellar convection theories,” Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 176,
589–607.
Grec, G., E. Fossat, and M. Pomerantz, 1980, “Solar oscillations: full disk observations from the geographic South
Pole,” Nature (London) 288, 541–544.
Grevesse, N., and A. Noels, 1993, “Cosmic abundances of the
elements,” in Origin and evolution of the Elements, edited
by N. Prantzos, E. Vangioni-Flam, and M. Cassé (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England), p. 15–25.
Grevesse, N., and A. J. Sauval, 1998, “Standard solar composition,” Space Science Review 85, 161–174.
Gruzinov, A. V., and J. N. Bahcall, 1998, “Screening in thermonuclear reaction rates in the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 504,
996–1001.
Guenther, D. B., 1989, “Age of the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 339,
1156–1159.
Guenther, D. B., 1994, “Nonadiabatic nonradial p-mode frequencies of the standard solar model, with and without helium diffusion,” Astrophys. J. 422, 400–411.
Guenther, D. B., and P. Demarque, 1996, “Seismology of η
Bootis,” Astrophys. J. 456, 798–810.
Guenther, D. B., Y.-C. Kim, and P. Demarque, 1996, “Seismology of the standard solar model: tests of diffusion and
the OPAL and MHD equations of state,” Astrophys. J. 463,
382–390.
Guzik, J. A., and A. N. Cox, 1991, “Effects of opacity and
equation of state on solar structure and oscillations,” Astrophys. J. 381, 333–340.
Guzik, J. A., C. Neuforge-Verheecke, A. C. Young, R. I. Epstein, F. M. Poulin, and J. R. Schissel, 2001, “Standard and
non-standard solar models,” Solar Phys. 200, 305–321.
Haber, D. A., B. W. Hindman, J. Toomre, R. S. Bogart, and
F. Hill, 2001, “Development of multiple cells in meridional
flows and evolution of mean zonal flows from ring-diagram
analyses,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000
Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the
Millennium, ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 213–218.
Haber, D. A., B. W. Hindman, J. Toomre, R. S. Bogart, R. M.
Larsen, and F. Hill, 2002, “Evolving submerged meridional
circulation cells within the upper convection zone revealed
by ring-diagram analysis,” Astrophys. J. 570, 855–864.
Haber, D. A., B. W. Hindman, J. Toomre, R. S. Bogart, J.
Schou, and F. Hill, 1998, “Subphotospheric convective flows

Boulder), p. 117–137.
Gough, D. O., 1984a, “On the rotation of the Sun,” Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 313, 27–38.
Gough, D. O., 1984b, “Towards a solar model,” Mem. Soc.
Astron. Ital. 55, 13–35.
Gough, D. O., 1986, “EBK quantization of stellar waves,” in
Hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic problems in the
Sun and stars, edited by Y. Osaki (Department of Astronomy, University of Tokyo, Tokyo), p. 117–143.
Gough, D. O., 1990, “Comments on helioseismic inference,”
in Progress of Seismology of the Sun and Stars, Lecture
Notes in Physics 367, edited by Y. Osaki and H. Shibahashi
(Springer, Berlin), p. 283–318.
Gough, D. O., 1993, “Course 7. Linear adiabatic stellar pulsation,” in Les Houches Session XLVII: Astrophysical fluid
dynamics, edited by J.-P. Zahn and J. Zinn-Justin (Elsevier,
Amsterdam), p. 399–560.
Gough, D., 1996a, “Testing solar models: the inverse problem,” in Proceedings of the VI IAC Winter School “The
structure of the Sun”, edited by T. Roca Cortés and
F. Sánchez (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England),
p. 141–228.
Gough, D. O., 1996b, “Astereoasteroseismology,” Observatory 116, 313–315.
Gough, D. O., 2001a, “Lessons learned from solar oscillations,” in Astrophysical Ages and Time Scales, ASP Conference Series, vol. 245, edited by T. von Hippel, C. Simpson,
and N. Manset, (ASP, San Francisco), p. 31–43.
Gough, D. O., 2001b, “Inhomogeneity in the solar core,” Solar
Phys. 200, 297–303.
Gough, D. O., 2001c, “The new era in helioseismology,” in
Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 203: Recent insights
into the physics of the Sun and heliosphere: Highlights from
SOHO and other space missions, edited by P. Brekke, B.
Fleck, and J. B. Gurman (ASP, San Francisco), p. 3–20.
Gough, D. O., and A. G. Kosovichev, 1990, “Using helioseismic data to probe the hydrogen abundance in the solar
core,” in Proceedings of IAU Colloquium No 121, Inside the
Sun, edited by G. Berthomieu and M. Cribier (Kluwer, Dordrecht), p. 327–340.
Gough, D. O., A. G. Kosovichev, J. Toomre, et al., 1996b,
“The seismic structure of the Sun,” Science 272, 1296–1300.
Gough, D. O., and M. E. McIntyre, 1998, “Inevitability of a
magnetic field in the Sun’s radiative interior,” Nature (London) 394, 755–757.
Gough, D. O., and E. Novotny, 1990, “Sensitivity of solar
eigenfrequencies to the age of the Sun,” Solar Phys. 128,
143–160.
Gough, D. O., and T. Sekii, 2002, “On the effect of error
correlation on linear inversion,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.,
in the press.
Gough, D. O., T. Sekii, and P. B. Stark, 1996a, “Inferring
spatial variation of solar properties from helioseismic data,”
Astrophys. J. 459, 779–791.
Gough, D. O., and M. J. Thompson, 1988, “On the implications of the symmetric component of the frequency splitting
reported by Duvall, Harvey and Pomerantz,” in Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 123, Advances in helio- and asteroseismology, edited by J. Christensen-Dalsgaard and S.
Frandsen (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 175–180.

53

from MDI and GONG,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 /
GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the
Dawn of the Millennium, ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson
(ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands),
p. 137–142.
Howe, R., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, F. Hill, R. W. Komm,
R. M. Larsen, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and J. Toomre,
2000a, “Deeply penetrating banded zonal flows in the solar
convection zone,” Astrophys. J. 533, L163–L166.
Howe, R., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, F. Hill, R. W. Komm,
R. M. Larsen, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and J. Toomre,
2000b, “Dynamic variations at the base of the solar convection zone,” Science 287, 2456–2460.
Howe, R., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, F. Hill, R.W. Komm,
R. M. Larsen, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and J. Toomre,
2001b, “Solar cycle changes in convection zone dynamics
from MDI and GONG 1995-2000,” in Proceedings of the
SOHO 10 / GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the Millennium, ESA SP-464, edited
by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands), p. 19–26.
Howe, R., R. Komm, and F. Hill, 1999, “Solar-cycle changes
in GONG p-mode frequencies 1995-98,” Astrophys. J. 524,
1084–1095.
Howe, R., and M. J. Thompson, 1996, “On the use of the
error correlation function in helioseismic inversions,” Mon.
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 281, 1385–1392.
Howe, R., and M. J. Thompson, 1998, “A strategy for fitting
partially blended ridges in GONG solar p-mode spectra,”
Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 131, 539–548.
Hoyt, D. V., and K. H. Schatten, 1996, “How well was the
Sun observed during the Maunder Minimum?” Solar Phys.
165, 181–192.
Iben, I., and J. Mahaffy, 1976, “On the sun’s acoustical spectrum,” Astrophys. J. 209, L39–L43.
Ichimoto, K., J. Kubota, M. Suzuki, I. Tohmura, and H.
Kurokawa, 1985, “Periodic behaviour of solar flare activity,”
Nature (London) 316, 422–424.
Iglesias, C. A., and F. J. Rogers, 1996, “Updated OPAL opacities,” Astrophys. J. 464, 943–953.
Iglesias, C. A., F. J. Rogers, and B. G. Wilson, 1992, “Spinorbit interaction effects on the Rosseland mean opacity,”
Astrophys. J. 397, 717–728.
Jensen, J. M., T. L. Duvall, Jr., B. H. Jacobsen, and J.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, 2001, “Imaging an emerging active
region with helioseismic tomography,” Astrophys. J. 553,
L193–L196.
Jensen, J. M., B. H. Jacobsen, and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard,
2000, “Sensitivity kernels for time-distance inversion,” Solar
Phys. 192, 231–239.
Jensen, J. M., and F. P. Pijpers, 2002, “Sensitivity kernels for
time-distance inversion based on the Rytov approximation,”
Astron. Astrophys., submitted.
Jiménez-Reyes, S. J., C. Régulo, P. L. Pallé, and T. Roca
Cortés, 1998, “Solar activity cycle frequency shifts of lowdegree p-modes,” Astron. Astrophys. 329, 1119–1124.
Joss, P. C., 1974, “Are stellar surface heavy-element abundances systematically enhanced?” Astrophys. J. 191, 771–
774.
Kirsten, A., 1999, “Solar neutrino experiments: results and

determined by ring-diagram analyses of SOI-MDI observations,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop:
Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun and Sunlike stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A.
Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 791–796.
Haber, D. A., B. W. Hindman, J. Toomre, R. S. Bogart, M. J.
Thompson, and F. Hill, 2000, “Solar shear flows deduced
from helioseismic dense-pack samplings of ring diagrams,”
Solar Phys. 192, 335–350.
Hampel, W., J. Handt, G. Heusser, J. Kiko, et al.,
1999, “GALLEX solar neutrino observations: results from
GALLEX IV,” Phys. Lett. B 447, 127–133.
Hansen, C. J., J. P. Cox, and H. M. van Horn, 1977, “The
effects of differential rotation on the splitting of nonradial
modes of stellar oscillation,” Astrophys. J. 217, 151–159.
Hansen, P. C., 1990, “Truncated singular value decomposition
solutions to discrete ill-posed problems with ill-determined
numerical rank,” SIAM J. Sci. Stat. Comp. 11, 503–518.
Hansen, P. C., 1994, “The Backus-Gilbert method: SVD analysis and fast implementation,” Inverse Problems 10, 895–
904.
Hart, A. B., 1954, “Motions in the Sun at the photospheric
level. IV. The equatorial rotation and possible velocity fields
in the photosphere,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 114, 17–38.
Hart, A. B., 1956, “Motions in the Sun at the photospheric
level. VI. Large scale motions in the equatorial region,” Mon.
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 116, 38–55.
Harvey, J. W., F. Hill, R. P. Hubbard, et al., 1996, “The
Global Oscillation Network Group (GONG) project,” Science 272, 1284–1286.
Haxton, W. C., 1995, “The solar neutrino problem,” Ann.
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 33, 459–503.
Hill, F., 1988, “Rings and trumpets - three-dimensional power
spectra of solar oscillations,” Astrophys. J. 333, 996–1013.
Hill, F., P. B. Stark, R. T. Stebbins, et al., 1996, “The solar
acoustic spectrum and eigenmode parameters,” Science 272,
1292–1295.
Hill, H. A., R. T. Stebbins, and T. M. Brown, 1976, “Recent oblateness observations: Data, interpretation and significance for earlier work,” in Atomic Masses and Fundamental Constants, vol. 5, edited by J. H. Sanders and A. H.
Wapstra (Plenum Press, New York), p. 622–628.
Hindman, B., D. Haber, J. Toomre, and R. Bogart, 2001,
“Comparing local frequency shifts measured through ringdiagram analyses with global frequency shifts,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and
Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the Millennium, ESA SP464, edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 143–148.
Houdek, G., N. J. Balmforth, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and
D. O. Gough, 1999, “Amplitudes of stochastically excited oscillations in main-sequence stars,” Astron. Astrophys. 351,
582–596.
Howard, R., and B. J. LaBonte, 1980, “The Sun is observed
to be a torsional oscillator with a period of 11 years,” Astrophys. J. 239, L33–L36.
Howe, R., F. Hill, S. Basu, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, R.W.
Komm, R. M. Larsen, M. Roth, J. Schou, M. J. Thompson, and J. Toomre, 2001a, “Comparing mode frequencies

54

Larsen, R. M., 1997, “Iterative algorithms for twodimensional helioseismic inversion,” in Proceedings of the
Interdisciplinary Inversion Workshop 5, edited by B. H. Jacobsen (Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark), p. 123–137.
Larsen, R. M., and P. C. Hansen, 1997, “Efficient implementation of the SOLA mollifier method,” Astron. Astrophys.
Suppl. Ser. 121, 587–598.
Lazrek, M., A. Pantel, E. Fossat, et al., 1996, “Is the solar
core rotating faster or slower than the envelope?” Solar
Phys. 166, 1–16.
Ledoux, P., 1949, “Contributions à l’étude de la structure
interne des étoiles et de leur stabilité,” Mem. Soc. R. Sci.
Liège, 4th ser. 9, 3–294.
Ledoux, P., 1951, “The nonradial oscillations of gaseous stars
and the problem of beta Canis Majoris,” Astrophys. J. 114,
373–384.
Ledoux, P., 1962, “Sur la forme asymptotique des pulsations
radiales adiabatiques d’une étoile. I.,” Bull. Acad. roy. Belg.
Cl. Science, 5e serie 48, 240–254.
Ledoux, P., and T. Walraven, 1958, “Variable stars,” Handbuch der Physik, vol. 51, chapter IV (Springer, Berlin),
p. 353–604.
Leibacher, J., and R. F. Stein, 1971, “A new description of the
solar five-minute oscillation,” Astrophys. Lett. 7, 191–192.
Leighton, R. B., R. W. Noyes, and G. W. Simon, 1962, “Velocity fields in the solar atmosphere I. Preliminary report,”
Astrophys. J. 135, 474–499.
Li, L. H., F. J. Robinson, P. Demarque, and S. Sofia, 2002,
“Inclusion of turbulence in solar modeling,” Astrophys. J.
567, 1192–1201.
Libbrecht, K. G., 1988, “Solar p-mode frequency splittings,”
in Seismology of the Sun & Sun-like Stars, ESA SP-286,
edited by V. Domingo and E. J. Rolfe (ESA Publications
Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 131–136.
Libbrecht, K. G., 1989, “Solar p-mode frequency splittings,”
Astrophys. J. 336, 1092–1097.
Libbrecht, K. G., and M. F. Woodard, 1990, “Solar-cycle effects on solar oscillation frequencies,” Nature (London) 345,
779–782.
Libbrecht, K. G., and M. F. Woodard, 1991, “Advances in
helioseismology,” Science 253, 152–157.
Lighthill, M. J., 1952, “On sound generated aerodynamically
I. General theory,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London A211, 564–587.
Lindsey, C., and D. C. Braun, 1990, “Helioseismic imaging of
sunspots at their antipodes,” Solar Phys. 126, 101–115.
Lindsey, C., and D. C. Braun, 1997, “Helioseismic holography,” Astrophys. J. 485, 895–903.
Lindsey, C., and D. C. Braun, 1998, “Acoustic signatures of
subphotospheric structure underlying sunspots,” Astrophys.
J. 509, L129–L132.
Lindsey, C., and D. C. Braun, 2000a, “Basic principles of solar
acoustic holography,” Solar Phys. 192, 261–284.
Lindsey, C., and D. C. Braun, 2000b, “Seismic images of the
far side of the Sun,” Science 287, 1799–1801.
Lubow, S. H., E. J. Rhodes, Jr., and R. K. Ulrich, 1980,
“Five minute oscillations as a probe of the solar interior,”
in Nonradial and Nonlinear Stellar Pulsation, Lecture Notes
in Physics 125, edited by H. A. Hill and W. Dziembowski
(Springer, Berlin), p. 300–306.
Lynden-Bell, D., and J. P. Ostriker, 1967, “On the stability

implications,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1213–1232.
Kjeldsen, H., T. R. Bedding, M. Viskum, and S. Frandsen,
1995, “Solarlike oscillations in η Boo,” Astron. J. 109, 1313–
1319.
Korzennik, S. G., A. Cacciani, E. J. Rhodes, Jr., and R. K.
Ulrich, 1990, “Contribution of high degree frequency splittings to the inversion of the solar rotation rate,” in Progress
of Seismology of the Sun and Stars, Lecture Notes in Physics
367, edited by Y. Osaki and H. Shibahashi (Springer,
Berlin), p. 341–347.
Kosovichev, A. G., 1988, “The internal rotation of the Sun
from helioseismological data,” Pis’ma Astron. Zh. 14, 344–
352 [Sov. Astron. Lett. 14, 145–149 (1988)].
Kosovichev, A. G., 1996a, “Helioseismic constraints on the
gradient of angular velocity at the base of the solar convection zone,” Astrophys. J. 469, L61–L64.
Kosovichev, A. G., 1996b, “Tomographic imaging of the Sun’s
interior,” Astrophys. J. 461, L55–L57.
Kosovichev, A. G., 1997, “Inferences of element abundances
from helioseismic data,” in Robotic Exploration Close to the
Sun: Scientific Basis, AIP Conference Proceedings No 385,
edited by S. R. Habbal (AIP, New York), p. 159–166.
Kosovichev, A. G., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, W. Däppen,
W. A. Dziembowski, D. O. Gough, and M. J. Thompson,
1992, “Sources of uncertainty in direct seismological measurements of the solar helium abundance,” Mon. Not. R.
Astron. Soc. 259, 536–558.
Kosovichev, A. G., and T. L. Duvall, Jr., 1997, “Acoustic
tomography of solar convective flows and structures,” in
SCORe’96: Solar Convection and Oscillations and their Relationship, edited by F. P. Pijpers, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard,
and C. S. Rosenthal (Kluwer, Dordrecht), p. 241–260.
Kosovichev, A. G., T. L. Duvall, Jr., A. C. Birch, L. Gizon,
P. H. Scherrer, and J. Zhao, 2001, “Heliotomography of the
outer layers of the Sun,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 /
GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the
Dawn of the Millennium, ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson
(ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands),
p. 701–706.
Kosovichev, A. G., T. L. Duvall, Jr., and P. H. Scherrer, 2000,
“Time-distance inversion methods and results,” Solar Phys.
192, 159–176.
Kosovichev, A. G., and A. V. Fedorova, 1991, “Construction
of a seismic model of the sun,” Astron. Zh. 68, 1015–1029
[Sov. Astron. 35, 507–513 (1991)].
Kosovichev, A. G., and J. Schou, 1997, “Detection of zonal
shear flows beneath the Sun’s surface from f -mode frequency splitting,” Astrophys. J. 482, L207–L210.
Kosovichev, A. G., J. Schou, P. H. Scherrer, et al., 1997,
“Structure and rotation of the solar interior: initial results
from the MDI medium-l program,” Solar Phys. 170, 43–61.
Kuhn, J. R., 1988, “Helioseismological splitting measurements and the nonspherical solar temperature structure,”
Astrophys. J. 331, L131–L134.
Kumar, P., and S. Basu, 1999, “Line asymmetry of solar pmodes: Properties of acoustic sources,” Astrophys. J. 519,
396–399.
Kumar, P., and E. J. Quataert, 1997, “Angular momentum
transport by gravity waves and its effect on the rotation of
the solar interior,” Astrophys. J. 475, L143–L146.

55

mic spectra: asymmetrical line profile-fitting formula,” Astrophys. J. 505, L51–L54.
Nigam, R., and A. G. Kosovichev, 1999, “Source of solar
acoustic modes,” Astrophys. J. 514, L53–L56.
Nobili, A. M., and C. M. Will, 1986, “The real value of Mercury’s perihelion advance,” Nature (London) 320, 39–41.
Noerdlinger, P. D., 1977, “Diffusion of helium in the Sun,”
Astron. Astrophys. 57, 407–415.
Nordlund, Å., and R. F. Stein, 1997, “Stellar convection: general properties,” in SCORe’96: Solar Convection and Oscillations and their Relationship, edited by F. P. Pijpers, J.
Christensen-Dalsgaard, and C. S. Rosenthal (Kluwer, Dordrecht), p. 79–103.
Osaki, Y., 1975, “Nonradial oscillations of a 10 solar mass
star in the main-sequence stage,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan
27, 237–258.
Pamyatnykh, A. A., S. V. Vorontsov, and W. Däppen, 1991,
“A calibration of solar envelope models using the frequencies
of intermediate-degree solar acoustic oscillations,” Astron.
Astrophys. 248, 263–269.
Pap, J. M., and C. Fröhlich, 1999, “Total solar irradiance
variations,” J. Atmos. Solar-Terr. Phys. 61, 15–24.
Parker, E. N., 1993, “A solar dynamo surface wave at the
interface between convection and nonuniform rotation,” Astrophys. J. 408, 707–719.
Pedlosky, J., 1987, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, 2nd Ed.,
(Springer, New York).
Pérez Hernández, F., and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1994,
“The phase function for stellar acoustic oscillations – III.
The solar case,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 269, 475–492.
Peri, M. L., and K. G. Libbrecht, 1991, “A search for acoustic
amplitude deficit at the antipodes of sunspots,” Solar Phys.
132, 223–231.
Pidatella, R. M., M. Stix, G. Belvedere, and L. Paterno, 1986,
“The role of inhomogeneous heat transport and anisotropic
momentum exchange in the dynamics of stellar convection
zones: application to models of the Sun’s differential rotation,” Astron. Astrophys. 156, 22–32.
Pijpers, F. P., 1997, “Solar rotation inversions and the relationship between a-coefficients and mode splittings,” Astron. Astrophys. 326, 1235–1240.
Pijpers, F. P., 1998, “Helioseismic determination of the solar
gravitational quadrupole moment,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 297, L76–L80.
Pijpers, F. P., and M. J. Thompson, 1992, “Faster formulations of the optimally localized averages method for helioseismic inversion,” Astron. Astrophys. 262, L33–L36.
Pijpers, F. P., and M. J. Thompson, 1994, “The SOLA
method for helioseismic inversion,” Astron. Astrophys. 281,
231–240.
Pinsonneault, M. H., S. D. Kawaler, S. Sofia, and P. Demarque, 1989, “Evolutionary models of the rotating Sun,” Astrophys. J. 338, 424–452.
Plaskett, H. H., 1916, “A variation in the solar rotation,”
Astrophys. J. 43, 145–160.
Proffitt, C. R., 1994, “Effects of heavy-element settling on
solar neutrino fluxes and interior structure,” Astrophys. J.
425, 849–855.
Proffitt, C. R., and G. Michaud, 1991, “Gravitational settling
in solar models,” Astrophys. J. 380, 238–250.

of differentially rotating bodies,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
136, 293–310.
Marchenkov, K., I. Roxburgh, and S. Vorontsov, 2000, “Nonlinear inversion for the hydrostatic structure of the solar
interior,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 312, 39–50.
Marchenkov, K. I., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1990, “Seismic
sounding of the outer regions of the Sun,” Pis’ma Astron.
Zh. 16, 444–451 [Sov. Astron. Lett. 16, 189–192 (1990)].
Martić, M., J. Schmitt, J.-C. Lebrun, C. Barban, P. Connes,
F. Bouchy, E. Michel, A. Baglin, T. Appourchaux, and J.-L.
Bertaux, 1999, “Evidence for global pressure oscillations on
Procyon,” Astron. Astrophys. 351, 993–1002.
Matthews, J. M., 1998, “Asteroseismology from space: getting the MOST science from the least money,” in Proceedings
of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418,
edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson, (ESA Publications
Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 395–398.
Mestel, L., 1968, “Magnetic braking by a stellar wind—I,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 138, 359–391.
Michaud, G., and C. R. Proffitt, 1993, “Particle transport
processes,” in Proceedings of IAU Colloquium No 137: Inside the stars, ASP Conference Series, vol. 40, edited by A.
Baglin and W. W. Weiss (ASP, San Francisco), p. 246–259.
Miesch, M. S., 2000, “The coupling of solar convection and
rotation,” Solar Phys. 192, 59–89.
Miesch, M. S., J. R. Elliott, J. Toomre, T. L. Clune, G. A.
Glatzmaier, and P. A. Gilman, 2000, “Three-dimensional
spherical simulations of solar convection. I. Differential rotation and pattern evolution achieved with laminar and turbulent states,” Astrophys. J. 532, 593–615.
Mihalas, D., W. Däppen, and D. G. Hummer, 1988, “The
equation of state for stellar envelopes. II. Algorithm and
selected results,” Astrophys. J. 331, 815–825.
Mikheyev, S. P., and A. Yu. Smirnov, 1985, “Resonance enhancement of oscillations in matter and solar neutrino spectroscopy,” Yad. Fiz. 42, 1441–1448 [Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 42,
913–917 (1985)].
Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and M. J.
Thompson, 1994, “Seismic study of overshoot at the base
of the solar convective envelope,” Astron. Astrophys. 283,
247–262.
Morel, P., B. Pichon, J. Provost, and G. Berthomieu, 1999,
“Solar models and NACRE thermonuclear reaction rates,”
Astron. Astrophys. 350, 275–285.
Morel, P., J. Provost, and G. Berthomieu, 1997, “Updated
solar models,” Astron. Astrophys. 327, 349–360.
Morel, P., J. Provost, and G. Berthomieu, 2000, “About the
time of evolution of a solar model,” Astron. Astrophys. 353,
771–774.
Moreno-Insertis, F., and S. K. Solanki, 2000, “Distribution of
magnetic flux on the solar surface and low-degree p-modes,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 313, 411–422.
Neuforge-Verheecke, C., S. Goriely, J. A. Guzik, F. J. Swenson, and P. A. Bradley, 2001, “Seismological tests of solar
models calculated with the NACRE reaction rates and the
Grevesse and Sauval 1998 mixture,” Astrophys. J. 550, 493–
502.
Nigam, R., and A. G. Kosovichev, 1998, “Measuring the
Sun’s eigenfrequencies from velocity and intensity helioseis-

56

Goode, 1998, “On the accuracy of helioseismic determination of solar helium abundance,” Astron. Astrophys. 338,
756–760.
Richard, O., S. Vauclair, C. Charbonnel, and W. A. Dziembowski, 1996, “New solar models including helioseismological constraints and light-element depletion,” Astron. Astrophys. 312, 1000–1011.
Ritzwoller, M. H., and E. M. Lavely, 1991, “A unified approach to the helioseismic forward and inverse problems of
differential rotation,” Astrophys. J. 369, 557–566.
Roddier, F., 1975, “Principe de réalisation d’un hologramme
acoustique de la surface du Soleil,” C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris,
Ser. B 281, 93–95.
Rogers, F. J., F. J. Swenson, and C. A. Iglesias, 1996, “OPAL
Equation-of-State Tables for Astrophysical Applications,”
Astrophys. J. 456, 902–908.
Rosenthal, C. S., 1998, “Peaks and throughs in helioseismology: the power spectrum of solar oscillations,” Astrophys.
J. 508, 864–875.
Rosenthal, C. S., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, Å. Nordlund,
R. F. Stein, and R. Trampedach, 1999, “Convective contributions to the frequencies of solar oscillations,” Astron.
Astrophys. 351, 689–700.
Rouse, C. A., 1977, “On the first twenty modes of radial oscillation of the 1968 non-standard solar model,” Astron. Astrophys. 55, 477–480.
Roxburgh, I. W., 2001, “Gravitational multipole moments of
the Sun determined from helioseismic estimates of the internal structure and rotation,” Astron. Astrophys. 377, 688–
690.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1994a, “The seismology of stellar cores: a simple theoretical description of the
‘small frequency separations’,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
267, 297–302.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1994b, “Seismology of
the solar envelope: the base of the convection zone as seen
in the phase shift of acoustic waves,” Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 268, 880–888.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 1995, “An asymptotic
description of solar acoustic oscillations with an elementary
excitation source,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 272, 850–858.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 2000a, “Semiclassical
approximation for low-degree stellar p modes – I. The classical eigenfrequency equation,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
317, 141–150.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 2000b, “Semiclassical
approximation for low-degree stellar p modes – II. Classical
ray tracing,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 317, 151–157.
Roxburgh, I. W., and S. V. Vorontsov, 2001, “Semiclassical
approximation for low-degree stellar p modes – III. Acoustic resonances and diagnostic properties of the oscillation
frequencies,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 322, 85–96.
Sagan, C., and G. Mullen, 1972, “Earth and Mars: evolution
of atmospheres and surface temperatures,” Science 177, 52–
56.
Salpeter, E. E., 1954, “Electron screening and thermonuclear
reactions,” Austr. J. Phys. 7, 373–388.
Samadi, R., M.-J. Goupil, and Y. Lebreton, 2001, “Excitation
of stellar p-modes by turbulent convection. II. The Sun,”
Astron. Astrophys. 370, 147–156.

Pulkkinen, P., I. Tuominen, A. Brandenburg, Å. Nordlund,
and R. F. Stein, 1993, “Rotational effects on convection simulated at different latitude,” Astron. Astrophys. 267, 265–
274.
Queloz, D., M. Mayor, S. Udry, et al., 2001, “From CORALIE
to HARPS. The way towards 1 m s−1 precision Doppler measurements,” ESO Messenger, No. 105, 1–7.
Rabello-Soares, M. C., S. Basu, and J. ChristensenDalsgaard, 1999, “On the choice of parameters in solar structure inversion,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 309, 35–47.
Rabello-Soares, M. C., S. Basu, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard,
and M. P. Di Mauro, 2000, “The potential of solar highdegree modes for structure inversion,” Solar Phys. 193, 345–
356.
Rabello-Soares, M. C., S. G. Korzennik, and J. Schou, 2001,
“The determination of MDI high-degree mode frequencies,”
in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000 Workshop:
Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the Millennium,
ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 129–136.
Rast, M. P., and T. J. Bogdan, 1998, “On the asymmetry of
solar acoustic line profiles,” Astrophys. J. 496, 527–537.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., A. Cacciani, S. G. Korzennik, S. Tomczyk, R. K. Ulrich, and M. F. Woodard, 1990, “Depth and
latitude dependence of the solar internal angular velocity,”
Astrophys. J. 351, 687–700.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., A. Cacciani, S. G. Korzennik, and
R. K. Ulrich, 1993, “Confirmation of solar cycle-dependent
intermediate-degree p-mode frequency shifts,” Astrophys. J.
406, 714–722.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., A. Cacciani, S. Tomczyk, and R. K. Ulrich,
1986, “The 1984 solar oscillation program of the Mt. Wilson
60-foot tower,” in Seismology of the Sun and the Distant
Stars, edited by D. O. Gough (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 309–
332.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., A. Cacciani, M. Woodard, S. Tomczyk,
S. Korzennik, and R. K. Ulrich, 1987, “Estimates of the
solar internal angular velocity obtained with the Mt. Wilson
60-foot solar tower,” in The internal solar angular velocity,
edited by B. R. Durney and S. Sofia (Reidel, Dordrecht),
p. 75–82.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., A. G. Kosovichev, J. Schou, P. H. Scherrer,
and J. Reiter, 1997, “Measurements of frequencies of solar
oscillations from the MDI medium-l program,” Solar Phys.
175, 287–310.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., J. Reiter, J. Schou, A. G. Kosovichev,
and P. H. Scherrer, 2001, “Observed and predicted ratios of
the horizontal and vertical components of the solar p-mode
velocity eigenfunctions,” Astrophys. J. 561, 1127–1143.
Rhodes, E. J., Jr., R. K. Ulrich, and G. W. Simon, 1977,
“Observations of nonradial p-mode oscillations on the Sun,”
Astrophys. J. 218, 901–919.
Ribes, J. C., and E. Nesme-Ribes, 1993, “The solar sunspot
cycle in the Maunder minimum AD 1645 to AD 1715,” Astron. Astrophys. 276, 549–563.
Ricci, B., V. Berezinsky, S. Degl’Innocenti, W. A. Dziembowski, and G. Fiorentini, 1997, “Helioseismic constraints
to the central solar temperature and neutrino flux,” Phys.
Lett. B 407, 155–160.
Richard, O., W. A. Dziembowski, R. Sienkiewicz, and P. R.

57

netic activity, (Cambridge University, Cambridge, England).
Schwarzschild, M., 1958, Structure and evolution of the stars
(Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey).
Scuflaire, R., M. Gabriel, A. Noels, and A. Boury, 1975, “Oscillatory periods in the Sun and theoretical models with or
without mixing,” Astron. Astrophys. 45, 15–18.
Severny, A. B., V. A. Kotov, and T. T. Tsap, 1976, “Observations of solar pulsations,” Nature (London) 259, 87–89.
Shaviv, N. J., and G. Shaviv, 2001, “The electrostatic screening of nuclear reactions in the Sun,” Astrophys. J. 558, 925–
942.
Shibahashi, H., and M. Takata, 1996, “A seismic model deduced from the sound-speed distribution and an estimate of
the neutrino flux,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 48, 377–387.
Skartlien, R., 2002, “Local helioseismology as an inverse
source-inverse scattering problem,” Astrophys. J. 565,
1348–1365.
Skumanich, A., 1972, “Time scales for Ca II emission decay,
rotational braking, and lithium depletion,” Astrophys. J.
171, 565–567.
Smeyers, P., 1968, “Sur la forme asymptotique des modes
non radiaux dans les étoiles massives,” Ann. d’Astrophys.
31, 159–165.
Snodgrass, H. B., 1987, “Torsional oscillations and the solar
cycle,” Solar Phys. 110, 35–49.
Soufi, F., M. J. Goupil, and W. A. Dziembowski, 1998, “Effects of moderate rotation on stellar pulsation. I. Third order
perturbation formalism,” Astron. Astrophys. 334, 911–924.
Spergel, D. N., and W. H. Press, 1985, “Effect of hypothetical,
weakly interacting, massive particles on energy transport in
the solar interior,” Astrophys. J. 294, 663–673.
Spiegel, E. A., and J.-P. Zahn, 1992, “The solar tachocline,”
Astron. Astrophys. 265, 106–114.
Stein, R. F., 1967, “Generation of acoustic and gravity waves
by turbulence in an isothermal stratified atmosphere,” Solar
Phys. 2, 385–432.
Stein, R. F., and Å. Nordlund, 1998a, “Simulations of solar
granulation. I. General properties,” Astrophys. J. 499, 914–
933.
Stein, R. F., and Å. Nordlund, 1998b, “Convection and pmodes,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun
and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik
and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands), p. 693–698.
Stein, R. F., and Å. Nordlund, 2001, “Solar oscillations and
convection: II. Excitation of radial oscillations,” Astrophys.
J. 546, 585–603.
Takata, M., and H. Shibahashi, 1998, “Solar models based on
helioseismology and the solar neutrino problem,” Astrophys.
J. 504, 1035–1050.
Talon, S., and J.-P. Zahn, 1998, “Towards a hydrodynamical model predicting the observed solar rotation profile,”
Astron. Astrophys. 329, 315–318.
Tassoul, M., 1980, “Asymptotic approximations for stellar
nonradial pulsations,” Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 43, 469–
490.
Thiery, S., P. Boumier, A. H. Gabriel, L. Bertello, M. Lazrek,
R. A. Garcı́a, G. Grec, J. M. Robillot, T. Roca Cortés, S.
Turck-Chièze, and R. K. Ulrich, 2000, “Analysis of asym-

Schatzman, E., A. Maeder, F. Angrand, and R. Glowinski,
1981, “Stellar evolution with turbulent diffusion mixing. III.
The solar model and the neutrino problem,” Astron. Astrophys. 96, 1–16.
Scherrer, P. H., R. S. Bogart, R. I. Bush, J. T. Hoeksema,
A. G. Kosovichev, J. Schou, W. Rosenberg, L. Springer,
T. D. Tarbell, A. Title, C. J. Wolfson, I. Zayer, and the MDI
engineering team, 1995, “The Solar Oscillation Investigation
– Michelson Doppler Imager,” Solar Phys. 162, 129–188.
Schiff, L. I., 1949, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw Hill, New
York).
Schou, J., 1992, “On the analysis of helioseismic data,” PhD
thesis (University of Aarhus, Denmark).
Schou, J., 1998a, “How low can we get: the quest for ever
lower frequencies,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG
98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the
Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 341–344.
Schou, J., 1998b, “Observations of medium- and high-degree
modes: methods and sand-traps,” in Proceedings of the
SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of
the interior of the Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418,
edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 47–52.
Schou, J., 1999, “Migration of zonal flows detected using
Michelson Doppler Imager f -mode frequency splittings,”
Astrophys. J. 523, L181–L184.
Schou, J., H. M. Antia, S. Basu, et al., 1998, “Helioseismic
studies of differential rotation in the solar envelope by the
Solar Oscillations Investigation using the Michelson Doppler
Imager,” Astrophys. J. 505, 390–417.
Schou, J., and R. S. Bogart, 1998, “Flows and horizontal
displacement from ring diagrams,” Astrophys. J. 504, L131–
L134.
Schou, J., and D. L. Buzasi, 2001, “Observations of p-modes
in α Cen,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000
Workshop: Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the
Millennium, ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), 391–394.
Schou, J., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and M. J. Thompson,
1994, “On comparing helioseismic two-dimensional inversion
methods,” Astrophys. J. 433, 389–416.
Schou, J., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, and M. J. Thompson,
1995, “Some aspects of helioseismic time-series analysis,”
in Proceedings of GONG’94: Helio- and Astero-seismology
from Earth and Space, ASP Conference Series, vol. 76,
edited by R. K. Ulrich, E. J. Rhodes, Jr., and W. Däppen
(ASP, San Francisco), p. 528–531.
Schou, J., R. Howe, S. Basu, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, T.
Corbard, F. Hill, R. M. Larsen, M. C. Rabello-Soares, and
M. J. Thompson, 2002, “A comparison of solar p-mode parameters from the Michelson Doppler Imager and the Global
Oscillation Network Group: splitting coefficients and rotation inversions,” Astrophys. J., 567, 1234–1249.
Schou, J., A. G. Kosovichev, P. R. Goode, and W. A. Dziembowski, 1997, “Determination of the Sun’s seismic radius
from the SOHO Michelson Doppler Imager,” Astrophys. J.
489, L197–L200.
Schrijver, C. J., and C. Zwaan, 2000, Solar and stellar mag-

58

2001b, “Solar internal composition and nuclear reaction
rates in the light of helioseismology,” Solar Phys. 200, 323–
342.
Turcotte, S., J. Richer, G. Michaud, C. A. Iglesias, and F. J.
Rogers, 1998, “Consistent solar evolution model including
diffusion and radiative acceleration effects,” Astrophys. J.
504, 539–558.
Ulrich, R. K., 1970, “The five-minute oscillations on the solar
surface,” Astrophys. J. 162, 993–1001.
Ulrich, R. K., 1986, “Determination of stellar ages from asteroseismology,” Astrophys. J. 306, L37–L40.
Ulrich, R. K., 1998, “Identification of very large scale velocity structures on the solar surface using Mt. Wilson synoptic observations,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG
98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the
Sun and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands), p. 851–855.
Ulrich, R. K., 2001, “Very long lived wave patterns detected
in the solar surface velocity signal,” Astrophys. J. 560, 466–
475.
Ulrich, R. K., J. E. Boyden, L. Webster, H. B. Snodgrass, S. P.
Padilla, P. Gilman, and T. Shieber, 1988, “Solar rotation
measurements at Mount Wilson. V. Reanalysis of 21 years
of data,” Solar Phys. 117, 291–328.
Ulrich, R. K., and E. J. Rhodes, Jr., 1977, “The sensitivity of nonradial p mode eigenfrequencies to solar envelope
structure,” Astrophys. J. 218, 521–529.
Unno, W., Y. Osaki, H. Ando, H. Saio, and H. Shibahashi,
1989, Nonradial Oscillations of Stars, 2nd Edition (University of Tokyo, Tokyo).
Vandakurov, Yu. V., 1967, “The frequency distribution of
stellar oscillations,” Astron. Zh. 44, 786–797 [Soviet Astronomy AJ 11, 630–638 (1967)].
von Neuman, J., and E. Wigner, 1929, “Über merkwürdige
diskrete Eigenwerte. Über das Verhalten von Eigenwerten
bei adiabatischen Prozessen,” Phys. Z. 30, 467–470.
Vorontsov, S. V., 1989, “The inverse problem of helioseismology: the speed of sound in the solar interior,” Pis’ma Astron.
Zh. 15, 48–60 [Sov. Astron. Lett. 15, 21–26 (1989)].
Vorontsov, S. V., 1991, “Asymptotic theory of acoustic oscillations of the sun and stars,” Astron. Zh. 68, 808–824 [Sov.
Astron. 35, 400–408 (1991)].
Vorontsov, S. V., V. A. Baturin, and A. A. Pamyatnykh, 1991,
“Seismological measurement of solar helium abundance,”
Nature (London) 349, 49–51.
Vorontsov, S. V., V. A. Baturin, and A. A. Pamyatnykh, 1992,
“Seismology of the solar envelope: towards the calibration
of the equation of state,” Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 257,
32–46.
Vorontsov, S. V., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. Schou, V. N.
Strakhov, and M. J. Thompson, 2002, “Helioseismic Measurement of Solar Torsional Oscillations,” Science 296, 101–
103.
Vorontsov, S. V., and H. Shibahashi, 1991, “Asymptotic inversion of the solar oscillation frequencies: sound speed in
the solar interior,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 43, 739–753.
Wambsganss, J., 1988, “Hydrogen-helium-diffusion in solar
models,” Astron. Astrophys. 205, 125–128.
Watanabe, S., and H. Shibahashi, 2001, “Solar models with

metric p-mode profiles in GOLF data,” Astron. Astrophys.
355, 743–750.
Thompson, M. J., 1990, “A new inversion of solar rotational
splitting data,” Solar Phys. 125, 1–12.
Thompson, M. J., 1993, “Seismic investigation of the Sun’s
internal structure and rotation,” in Proceedings of GONG
1992: Seismic investigation of the Sun and stars, ASP Conference Series, vol. 42, edited by T. M. Brown (ASP, San
Francisco), p. 141–154.
Thompson, M. J., 2001, “Temporal variations of the Sun’s
internal structure and dynamics: a theoretical perspective,”
in Proceedings of the SOHO 10 / GONG 2000 Workshop:
Helio- and Asteroseismology at the Dawn of the Millennium,
ESA SP-464, edited by A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Netherlands), p. 39–44.
Thompson, M. J., J. Toomre, E. R. Anderson, et al., 1996,
“Differential rotation and dynamics of the solar interior,”
Science 272, 1300–1305.
Thoul, A. A., J. N. Bahcall, and A. Loeb, 1994, “Element
diffusion in the solar interior,” Astrophys. J. 421, 828–842.
Tomczyk, S., J. Schou, and M. J. Thompson, 1995, “Measurement of the rotation rate in the deep solar interior,”
Astrophys. J. 448, L57–L60.
Tomczyk, S., K. Streander, G. Card, D. Elmore, H. Hull, and
A. Cacciani, 1995, “An instrument to observe low-degree
solar oscillations,” Solar Phys. 159, 1–21.
Toutain, T., T. Appourchaux, C. Fröhlich, A. G. Kosovichev,
R. Nigam, and P. H. Scherrer, 1998, “Asymmetry and frequencies of low-degree p-modes and the structure of the
Sun’s core,” Astrophys. J. 506, L147–L150.
Toutain, T., and C. Fröhlich, 1992, “Characteristics of solar p-modes: Results from the IPHIR experiment,” Astron.
Astrophys. 257, 287–297.
Trimble, V., 1995, “A low-resolution view of high-resolution
spectroscopy,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 107, 1012–1015.
Tripathy, S. C., and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1998, “Opacity effects on the solar interior. I. Solar structure,” Astron.
Astrophys. 337, 579–590.
Tripathy, S. C., S. Basu, and J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 1998,
“Helioseismic determination of opacity corrections,” in Proceedings of IAU Symposium No 181: Sounding Solar and
Stellar Interiors; Poster Volume, edited by J. Provost and
F. X. Schmider (Université de Nice, Nice), p. 129–130.
Turck-Chièze, S., 1999, “The solar neutrino puzzle: the way
ahead,” New Astronomy 4, 325–332.
Turck-Chièze, S., S. Basu, A. S. Brun, et al., 1997, “First
view of the solar core from GOLF acoustic modes,” Solar
Phys. 175, 247–265.
Turck-Chièze, S., A. S. Brun, J. P. Chièze, and R. A. Garcia, 1998, “Predictions of the solar neutrino fluxes and the
solar gravity mode frequencies from the solar sound speed
profile,” in Proceedings of the SOHO 6/GONG 98 Workshop: Structure and dynamics of the interior of the Sun
and Sun-like stars, ESA SP-418, edited by S. G. Korzennik
and A. Wilson (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands), p. 549–553.
Turck-Chièze, S., S. Couvidat, A. G. Kosovichev, et al.,
2001a, “Solar neutrino emission deduced from a seismic
model,” Astrophys. J. 551, L69–L73.
Turck-Chièze, S., P. Nghiem, S. Couvidat, and S. Turcotte,

59

helioseismic constraints and the solar neutrino problem,”
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 53, 565–575.
Willson, R. C., and H. S. Hudson, 1991, “The Sun’s luminosity over a complete solar cycle,” Nature (London) 351,
42–44.
Wilson, P. R., D. Burtonclay, and Y. Li, 1997, “The rotational
structure of the region below the solar convection zone,”
Astrophys. J. 489, 395–402.
Wolfenstein, L., 1978, “Neutrino oscillations in matter,” Phys.
Rev. D 17, 2369–2374.
Wolff, C. L., 1972, “The five-minute oscillations as nonradial
pulsations of the entire Sun,” Astrophys. J. 177, L87–L91.
Woodard, M. F., 2002, “Solar subsurface flow inferred directly
from frequency-wavenumber correlations in the seismic velocity field,” Astrophys. J. 565, 634–639.
Woodard, M., and H. S. Hudson, 1983, “Frequencies, amplitudes and linewidths of solar oscillations from total irradiance observations,” Nature (London) 305, 589–593.
Woodard, M. F., S. G. Korzennik, M. C. Rabello-Soares, P.
Kumar, T. D. Tarbell, and S. Acton, 2001, “Energy distribution of solar oscillation modes inferred from space-based
measurements,” Astrophys. J. 548, L103–L106.
Woodard, M. F., and K. G. Libbrecht, 1993, “Solar activity and oscillation frequency splittings,” Astrophys. J. 402,
L77–L80.
Woodard, M. F., and R. W. Noyes, 1985, “Change of solar oscillation eigenfrequencies with the solar cycle,” Nature
(London) 318, 449–450.
Woodard, M. F., J. R. Kuhn, N. Murray, and K. G. Libbrecht,
1991, “Short-term changes in solar oscillation frequencies
and solar activity,” Astrophys. J. 373, L81–L84.
Xiong, D. R., Q. L. Cheng, and L. Deng, 2000, “Turbulent
convection and pulsational stability of variable stars: nonadiabatic oscillations of the solar p-modes,” Mon. Not. R.
Astron. Soc. 319, 1079–1093.
Zhao, J., A. G. Kosovichev, and T. L. Duvall, Jr., 2001, “Investigation of mass flows beneath a sunspot by time-distance
helioseismology,” Astrophys. J. 557, 384–388.
Zweibel, E. G., and D. O. Gough, 1995, “Is there a seismic
signature of the Sun’s magnetic field?” in Proceedings of
the Fourth SOHO Workshop: Helioseismology, ESA SP-376,
vol. 2, edited by J. T. Hoeksema, V. Domingo, B. Fleck, and
B. Battrick (ESA Publications Division, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands), p. 73–76.

60

